The Oxford Dictionary of IdiomsIdiomsEdited byJudith SiefringOXPORD
UNIVERSITY PRESS
OXFORD
UNIVERSITY PRESSGreat Clarendon Street, Oxford 0x2 6DP
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. 
It furthers the University objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
and education by publishing worldwide in
Oxford New YorkAuckland Bangkok Buenos Aires Cape Town Chennai
Dar es Salaam Delhi Hong Kong Istanbul Karachi Kolkata
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Mumbai Nairobi
Sào Paulo Shanghai Taipei Tokyo Toronto
Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University Press
in the UK and in certain other countries
Published in the United States
by Oxford University Press Inc.New York
Oxford University Press 1999, 2004
The moral rights of the author have been asserted
Database right Oxford University Press maker
First published 1999Second edition 2004
All rights reserved. No part of this publication maybe reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press,
or as expressly permitted by law, or under terms agreed with the appropriate
reprographics rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction
outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights Department,
Oxford University Press, at the address above
You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data availableLibrary of Congress Cataloging in Publication DataData available
ISBN 0-19-852711-X1
Designed by Jane Stevenson
Typeset in Swift and Frutigerby Kolam Information Services IndiaPrinted in Great Britain
by Clays Ltd. ContentsPreface viiDictionary of Idioms 1Index 323Preface
The aim of the Oxford Dictionary of Idioms is to provide clear definitions of
phrases and sayings for those who do not know what they mean, but also to
offer the curious reader interesting facts about the origins of phrases and
examples of their use. This second edition of the Oxford Dictionary ofIdioms is
based on the first edition, edited by Jennifer Speake. It maintains the first
edition focus on contemporary and historical phrases, sayings, and
proverbs, and uses a combination of definition and where required
explanatory note and illustrative quotation to provide a rounded picture of
idiomatic usage. The coverage of the previous edition has been extended by
the inclusion of more than 350 new idioms, and a great many contemporary
illustrative quotations have also been added. These quotations have been
taken from a variety of sources: from novels to travel guides, broadsheet
newspapers to teenage magazines. They help to give the reader a better
understanding of how an idiom is used: a typical context, a certain tone, or a
particular resonance. The formation of new phrases and sayings is one of
the most colourful aspects of language development, and by adding idioms
such as chew the scenery, be in like Flynn, and give someone the hairy
eyeball, and quotations from the likes of Anthony Bourdain, Arundhati Roy,
Melvin Burgess, and Tom Clancy, the new edition hopes to reflect this
colour. 
A new index section at the end of the book groups together idioms which
share a common theme or subject, so giving readers a vivid snapshot of
those areas and aspects of life that have generated a particularly rich variety
offigurativeexpressions. 
My thanks must go to Richard Jones for his work on sourcing quotations,
to Georgia Hole for proofreading, and above all to Sara Hawker for her help
and insight throughout the project. 
JUDITH SIEFRINGAa
A abdabsA 1 excellent; first-rate. give someone the screaming abdabs induce
an attack of extreme anxiety or irritation in
The full form of this expression is 47 at
Lloyd  . In Lloyd Register of Shipping, the
someone. 
phrase was used of ships in first-class Abdabs or habdabs is mid 20th-century !
condition as to the hull A and stores 1. The slang whose origin is unknown. The word is
US equivalent is A No. 7; both have been in sometimes also used to mean an attack of
figurative use since the mid 19th century. delirium tremens. 
from A to B from your starting point to yourdestination; from one place to another. abet
1987 K. Rushforth Tree Planting & Managementaid and abet: see AID. 
The purpose of street tree planting
is to... make the roads and thoroughfares
pleasant in their own right, not just as places about
used to travel from A to B. know what you are about be aware of the
from A to Z over the entire range; in every implications of your actions or of a
particular. situation, and of how best to deal with
1998 Salmon, Trout & Sea-Trout In order to have them, informal
seen Scotland gamefishingin its entirety, 1993 Ski Survey He ran a 3-star guest house
from A to Z, visiting 30 stretches ofriverand before this, so knows what he is about. 
350 lochs a year, you would have to be
travelling for a hundred years. aboveabove yourself conceited; arrogant. 
aback 1999 Frank McCourt Tis Many a man made his
take someone aback shock, surprise, or way in America by the sweat of his brow and
disconcert someone. his strong back and it a good thing to learn
your station in life and not be getting above
The phrase is frequently used in the yourself. 
passive form be taken aback: this was not be above — be capable of stooping to an
adopted in the mid 19th century from unworthy act. earlier mid 18th-century nautical
1991 Maureen Duffy Illuminations The copyist
terminology, to describe the situation of a
was not above turning author or forger and
ship with its sails pressed back against the
mast by a headwind, preventing forwardseveral MS from this period must be viewed
movement. as highly suspect. 
1991 Kathleen Jones Learning Not To Be First
They were taken aback by the shabbiness of Abraham
the hotel and lack of cleanliness in the city in Abraham bosom in heaven, the place of
generally. rest for the souls of the blessed, dated
The phrase is taken from Luke 16:22: And !
it came to pass, that the beggar died, and was ABC carried by the angels into Abraham bosom ,
as easy or simple as ABC extremely easy or In the Bible, Abraham was the Hebrew
straightforward. patriarch from whom all Jews traced their
descent. 
From the 15th to the 17th century, achild first spelling and reading book was
commonly called an ABC, and this led to the acceptable
development of its metaphorical use, the
the acceptable face of the tolerable or
basic elements or rudiments of something. 
attractive manifestation or aspect of. 
accident 2
1996 New York Review of Books He presents The a highest playing card in its
himself as the acceptable face of suit in many card games, so a cheating player gambling... the man who, almost single- mightwellhideonetouseagainstan unwary ;
handedly, has turned a huckster paradise opponent. A North American variant is an ace 
into a gangster-free zone. in the hole. The next two idioms are also
based on this meaning of ace. 
accident
an accident waiting to happen a hold all the aces have all the advantages. 
potentially disastrous situation, play your ace use your best resource. 
usually caused by negligent or faulty within an ace of very close to. 
procedures. a person certain to cause
trouble. Ace here has the figurative meaning of a tiny amount and is used with reference to
01997 Times Accidents are often said to be
thesinglespotontheplayingcard. Thephrase waiting to happen. It does not take muchwas first recorded in the early 18th century. 
imagination to see that the chaotic start to the
Whitbread round-the-world race... couldeasily have ended in tragedy. Achilles
accidents will happen however careful you an Achilles heel a person only vulnerable
try to be, it is inevitable that some spot; a serious or fatal weakness. 
unfortunate or unforeseen events will
occur. In Greek mythology, the nymph Thetis
dipped her infant son Achilles in the water of This phrase is a shortened form of the the River Styx to make him immortal, but the early 19th-century proverb accidents will heel by which she held him was not touched happen in the best regulated families. by the water; he was ultimately killed in
battle by an arrow wound in this one
a chapter of accidents: see CHAPTER. vulnerable spot. 
1998 Times The inclination to outlaw that ofaccord which it disapproves... is, if not the cloven
of your own accord voluntarily or without hoof beneath the hem of Tony Blair  
outside intervention. Government, certainly its Achilles heel. 
account acid
give a good or bad account of yourself the acid test a situation or event which
make a favourable or unfavourable finally proves whether something is good
impression through your performance or or bad, true or false, etc. 
actions. The original use of the phrase was to
settle or square accounts with someone describe a method of testing for gold with
0 pay money owed to someone. have nitric acid gold being resistant to the effects revenge on someone. of nitric acid. 1990 Which? These deals are designed to
accounting encourage impulse buying, so the acid test is
there no accounting for tastes it whether you would have bought anyway. 
impossible to explain why different people
come the acid be unpleasant or offensive;like different things, especially those
things which the speaker considers speak in a caustic or sarcastic manner. 
unappealing, proverb put the acid on someone try to extract a loan
or favour from someone. Australian & New
1 Since the late 18th century, this has been Zealand informal
the usual English form of the Latin expression de gustibus non est disputandum there is no !
disputing about tastes. acquaintance
have a nodding acquaintance withsomeone or something: see NODDING. 
ace scrape acquaintance with: see SCRAPE. 
have an ace up your sleeve have an effective
resource or piece of information kept
hidden until it is necessary to use it; have a acre
secret advantage. God acre: see GOD. 3 admirable
Originally, this was an order to naval
across personnel to go to their allocated positions
across the board applying to all. ready to engage the enemy. 
n the USA, this expression refers to a
horse-racing bet in which equal amounts are man of action a man whose life is
staked on the same horse to win, place, or characterized by physical activity or deeds
show in a race. rather than by words or intellectualmatters. 
1999 Wall Street Journal The decline for the
euro across the board was mainly attributed to a piece of the action: see PIECE. 
the further erosion of global investors where the action is where important or
confidence toward the euro-zone economy. interesting things are happening, informal
be across something fully understand the 1971 Gourmet You can dine outside,
details or complexity of an issue or weather permitting, or in the bar where
situation. Australian the action is. 
act actualact your age behave in a manner appropriate your actual — the real, genuine, or
to your age and not to someone much important thing specified, informal
younger. 1968 Kenneth Williams Diary There no doubt
about it, on a good day, look quite lovely in
act the goat: see GOAT. your actual gamin fashion. 
act of God an instance of uncontrollable
natural forces in operation. Adam
This phrase is often used in insurance not know someone from Adam not know or
contracts to refer to incidents such as be completely unable to recognize the
lightning strikes or floods. person in question, informal
a class act: see CLASS. the old Adam unregenerate human nature. 
clean up your act: see CLEAN. In Christian symbolism, the old Adam
do a disappearing act: see DISAPPEARING. ! represents fallen man as contrasted with the 
second Adam, Jesus Christ. 
get your act together organize yourself in
the manner required in order to achieve 1993 Outdoor Canada It is the Old Adam in us. 
something, informal We are descendants of a long line of dirt
2002 New York Times There are still many who farmers, sheepherders... and so forth. 
think all that the dirty, homeless man on the
corner talking to himself needs is just to get add
his act together. 
add fuel to the fire: see FUEL. a hard or tough act to follow an
add insult to injury: see INSULT. 
achievement or performance which sets
a standard difficult for others to measureup to. adder
1996 Independent Her determination and deaf as an adder: see DEAF. 
championing of tourism will be a tough act to
follow. admirable
in on the act involved in a particular an admirable Crichton a person who
activity in order to gain profit or excels in all kinds of studies and
advantage, informal pursuits, or who is noted for supreme
1997 What Cellphone Conference calls are competence. 
becoming big business for the fixed-line
operators, and now there are signs that the This expression originally referred to
mobile networks are getting in on the act. ames Crichton of Clunie 1560-85?, a
read someone the riot act: see A D. Scottish nobleman renowned for his
intellectual and physical prowess. In J. M. 
Barrie play The Admirable Crichton 1902, action the eponymous hero is a butler who takes
charge when his master family is ship action stations an order or warning towrecked on a desert island. 
prepare for action. adrift 4
adrift something because neither party will
compromise or be persuaded. 
cast or cut someone adrift leave
someone in a boat or other craft which has
nothing to secure or guide it. abandon oragreement
isolate someone. a gentleman agreement: see GENTLEMAN. 
01998 Oldie The various dissenting move ments ... should be cut adrift and left to their
own devices. aheadahead of the game ahead of your
advance competitors or peers in the same sphereof activity. 
any advance on —? any higher bid1996 Daily Telegraph The smart money headed
than —?for Chinatown, where you can pick up all
This phrase is said by an auctioneer to those Eastern looks the designers are
elicit a higher bid, and so is used figuratively promoting for next spring ahead of the
as a query about general progress in a game. 
particular matter. ahead of your or its time innovative and
radical by the standards of the time. 
streets ahead: see STREET. 
advocate
play devil advocate: see DEVIL. aid
aid and abet help and encourage someone
afraid to do something wrong, especially to
afraid of your own shadow: see SHADOW. commit a crime. 
Africa Abet comes from an Old French term
meaning to encourage a hound to bite. for Africa in abundance; in large numbers. 
South African informal 1986 Frank Peretti This Present Darkness She
1980 C. Hope A Separate Development An entire strained to think of... any friend who would
museum of vintage stuff including... still aid and abet a fugitive from the law,
Bentleys for Africa. without questions. 
after in aid of in support of; for the purpose of
be after doing something be on the point of raising money for. chiefly British
doing something or have just done it. Irish 1999 Teesdale Mercury A wine and savoury
1988 Roddy Doyle The Commitments after evening in aid of cancer research will be
rememberin. forgot to bring mine back. It held... on Friday. 
under me bed. what all this in aid of? what is the purposeof this? British informalage
act your age: see ACT. air
the awkward age: see AWKWARD. airs and graces an affected manner of
come of age of a person reach adult behaving, designed to attract or impress. 
status, of a movement or activity British
become fully established. give yourself airs act pretentiously or
snobbishly. feel your age: see FEEL. 
1948 Christopher Bush The Case of the Second
a golden age: see GOLDEN. Chance It was said she gave herself airs, and it
under age: see UNDER. was also hinted that she was no better—as
they say—than she might be. agenda
a hidden agenda: see HIDDEN. : Air in the sense of an affected manner 
has been current since the mid 17th century; agony from the early 18th century the plural
form has been more usual in this derogatory pile on the agony: see PILE. sense. 
prolong the agony: see PROLONG. 
hot air: see HOT. agree up in the air of a plan or issue still to be
agree to differ cease to argue about settled; unresolved. 5 all
1995 Scientific American Prospects for federal 1990 Times Thatcherism may be dying on its
research and development are up in the air as feet in Britain, but it is alive and well in foreign
Republicans looking for budget cuts take parts. control on Capitol Hill. 
on or off the air being or not being
broadcast on radio or television. all
all and sundry everyone. 
take the air go out of doors. 1991 Sunday Times In the manner of an Oscar walk on air feel elated. winner, she thanks all and sundry for their
1977 Bernard MacLaverty Secrets sure help. 
you re walking on air, my mother said to Paul all comers anyone who chooses to take
at his wedding. part in an activity, typically acompetition. 
aisle 1992 AI Gore Earth in the Balance He has
have people rolling in the aisles make an traveled to conferences and symposia in every
audience laugh uncontrollably, be very part of the world, argued his case, and
amusing, informal patiently taken on all comers. 
O1940 P. G. Wodehouse Quick Service made
all-in with everything included. 
the speech of a lifetime. had them tearing up
exhausted. British informal
the seats and rolling in the aisles. all my eye and Betty Martin: see EYE. 
aitch all of as much as often used ironically of an
amount considered very small by the
drop your aitches: see DROP. speaker or writer. 
Aladdin 1995 Bill Bryson Notesfroma Small Island In
1992, a development company... tore downan Aladdin cave a place full of valuable
five listed buildings, in a conservation area,
objects. was taken to court and fined all of £675. 
an Aladdin lamp a talisman that enables its be all one to make no difference to
owner to fulfil every desire. 
someone.n re Arabian Nights tale of Aladdin,
the hero finds a magic lamp in a cave. He
all out using all your strength or resources. 
discoversthatrubbingitsummonsapowerful all over the place in a state of confusion or
genie who is able to carry out all his wishes. disorganization, informal
Other variants of this phrase include a
alarm over the map and all over the lot which are
North American, and all over the shop which alarms and excursions confused activity and
is mainly British. uproar, humorous
1997 Spectator The government... proposed
Alarm was formerly spelled alarum,
equalising standards and making them
representing a pronunciation with a rollingcomparable... there could be no clearer
of the ; the phrase was originally a call
admission that standards are all over the
summoning soldiers to arms. The whole
place. 
phrase is used in stage directions in
Shakespeare to indicate a battle scene. all the rage: see RAGE. 
all round in all respects, for or by eachalight person. 
set the world alight: see SET. all-singing, all-dancing with every possible
attribute; able to perform any necessary
alive function. British informal
alive and kicking prevalent and very active. This phrase is used particularly in the area
informal of computer technology, but it was originally
1991 Mark Tully No Full Stops in India You used to describe show-business acts. 
deliberately choose unknown actors, Ultimately, it may come from a series of 1929
although India is a country where the star posters which advertised the addition of
system is very much alive and kicking. sound to motion pictures. The first
Hollywood musical, MGM Broadwayalive and well still existing or active often
Melody, was promoted with the slogan All
used to deny rumours or beliefs that Talking All Singing Al ancing. 
something has disappeared or declined. 
all-clear 6
1991 Computing Each of the major Alpha and omega are respectively thefirst independents launched an all-singing and last letters of the Greek alphabet,
all-dancing graphics-oriented version last Christians use the phrase as a title for Jesus
year. Christ, taking it from Revelation 1:8: am
all systems go: see SYSTEM. Alpha and Omega, the beginning and theending, saith the Lord. 
be all that be very attractive or good. 
US informal 0 1 9 4 BBC Holidays At Cambridge... you ll
2002 Guardian can believe how she throws find the alpha and omega of American
herself at guys, she thinks she all that. academic life: historic Harvard and
space-age MIT Massachusetts Institute of
not all there not in full possession of your Technology. 
mental faculties, informal
be all things to all men: see THING. altar
— and all used to emphasize something sacrifice someone or something on the
additional that is being referred to. altar of make someone or something
informal suffer in the interests of someone or
1992 Kenichi Ohmae The Borderless World You something else. 
can whip up nationalist passions and stage 1994 Post Denver The cherished goal of a
manage protectionist rallies, bonfires and all. color-blind society... has been sacrificed on
be all go: see G O. the altar of political expediency. be all up with: see P. 
for all — in spite of—. altogether
1989 Independent For all their cruel, corrupt in the altogether without any clothes on;
and reckless vices, the Maharajahs were naked, informal
worshipped as gods by tens of thousands of 1991 Today The mothers... have agreed to
their subjects. pose in the altogether. 
all of a sudden: see SUDDEN. 
on all fours: see FOUR. American
as American as apple pie typically American
all-clear in character. 
give or get the all-clear indicate or get 1995 New York Times Magazine To reward
people for something beyond merit is
a sign that a dangerous situation is nowAmerican as apple pie. 
safe. 
the American dream the ideal by which
In wartime a signal or siren is often equality of opportunity is available to any
sounded to indicate that a bombing raid is American, allowing the highest aspirations
over. and goals to be achieved. alley amok
a blind alley: see BLIND. run amok behave uncontrollably and
up your alley: see up your street at STREET. disruptively. 
Amok, formerly also spelt amuck, comes
ally from the Malay word amuk, meaning in a
pass in your ally: see A S. homicidal frenzy , in which sense it was first
introduced into English in the early 16thcentury. ialong
along about round about a specified time or 1990 New York Review of Books Hersh article
date. North American informal or dialect is sensationalism run amok. It does no credit
1989 Motor Trend Along about this time, it to him or to The New York Times Magazine. 
had started raining, so they red-flagged the
race for a change to rain tires. analysis
in the final analysis when everything
alpha has been considered used to suggest
alpha and omega Othe beginning and the that the following statement expresses
end. the essence or most important the basic truth about a complex
features. situation. 7 appealancient ant
ancient as the hills: see HILL. have ants in your pants be fidgety or restless. 
the ancient of Days a biblical title for God, informaltaken from Daniel 7:9. any
angel not be having any of it be absolutely
the angel in the house a woman who is unwilling to cooperate, informal
completely devoted to her husband andfamily. anyoneThis was the title of a collection of poems !
anyone game an evenly balanced contest. 
on married love by Coventry Patmore be anyone of a person be open to sexual
1823-96, and it is now mainly used advances from anyone, informal
ironically. anythingon the side of the angels on the side of what
anything goes: see GOES. is right. In a speech in Oxford in November 1864 apart
the British statesman Benjamin Disraeli be poles apart: see POLE. 
alluded to the controversy over the origins of !
humankind then raging in the wake of the come apart at the seams: see SEAM. 
publication of Charles Darwin On the Origin of Species 1859: Is man an ape or an angel? ape
Now am on the side of the angels The Times go ape go wild; become violently excited. 
26 Nov. 1864. informalOriginally mid 20th-century North
angry American slang, this expression possibly
angry young man a young man who feels refers to the 1933 movie King Kong, which
stars a giant ape-like monster. 
and expresses anger at the conventional
values of the society around him. 
Originally, this term referred to a member apology
of a group of socially conscious writers in an apology for a very poor example of. 
Britain in the 1950s, in particular the 1998 Imogen de la Bere The Last Deception of
playwright John Osborne. The phrase, the Palliser Wentwood It an apology for a bridge,
title of a book 1951 by Leslie Paul, was used built of left-over stones. 
of Osborne in the publicity material for his
play Look Back in Anger 1956, in which the with apologies to used before the name of
characteristic views of the angry young an author or artist to indicate that
men were articulated by the anti-hero something is a parody or adaptation ofimmy Porter. their work. 
2001 This Old House With apologies to Robert
Frost, boundary expert Walter Robillard says,
answer Good fences on the proper line make goodthe answer a lemon: see LEMON. 
neighbours. a dusty answer: see DUSTY. appeal
ante appeal from Philip drunk to Philip sober ask
up or raise the ante increase what is at someone to reconsider, with the
stake or under discussion, especially in a suggestion that an earlier opinion or
conflict or dispute. decision represented only a passing
Ante comes from Latin, in which it means jmood. 
before. As an English noun it was originally This phrase comes from an anecdote told
in the early 19th century a term in poker and by the Roman historian and moralist Valerius
similar gambling games, meaning a stake Maximus concerning an unjust judgement
put up by a player before drawing cards. given by King Philip of Macedon: the woman 
condemned by Philip declared that she would 1998 New Scientist This report ups the ante on appeal to him once again, but this time when !
the pace at which these cases need to be he was sober. identified and treated. appearance 8
appeal to Caesar appeal to the highest apple pie
possible authority. as American as apple pie: see AMERICAN. 
The allusion is to the claim made by the
apostle Paul to have his case heard in Rome, apropos
which was his right as a Roman citizen: apropos of nothing having no relevance to
appeal unto Caesar Acts 25:11. 
any previous discussion or situation. appearance approval
keep up appearances maintain an seal or stamp of approval an indication or
statement that something is accepted orimpression of wealth or well-being. 
regarded favourably. 
to or by all appearances as far as can be
seen. This expression stems from the practice of 1991 Eric Lax Woody Allen To all appearances, putting a stamp or formerly a seal on official theirs was a unique case of sibling amity. documents. apple apron
apple of discord a subject of dissension. tied to someone apron strings too much
This expression refers to the Greek myth under the influence and control of
in which a golden apple inscribed for the someone especially used to suggest that
fairest was contended for by the goddesses a man is too much influenced by his
Hera, Athene, and Aphrodite. mother. 
the apple of your eye a person or thing ofwhom you are extremely fond and proud. area
a grey area: see GREY. 
n Old English, the phrase referred tothe pupil of the eye, considered to be a
a no-go area: see NO-GO. 
globular solid body; it came to be used as a
symbol of something cherished and watched argue
over. argue the toss dispute a decision or choice
apples and oranges of two people or things already made, informal, chiefly British
irreconcilably or fundamentally different. The toss in this phrase is the tossing of a
North American coin to decide an issue in a simple and
unambiguous way according to the side of
a rotten or bad apple a bad person in a the coin visible when it lands. 
group, typically one whose behaviour is
likely to have a corrupting influence on the
rest, informal ark
she apples used to indicate that everything out of the ark extremely old-fashioned. 
is in good order and there is nothing to The ark referred to is the biblical Noah  
worry about. Australian informal ark Genesis 6-7, in which Noah
endeavoured to save his family and two of
Apples and spice or apples and rice is
every kind of animal from the Flood. 
Australian rhyming slang for nice. apple cart arm
upset the apple cart wreck an advantageous a call to arms a call to make ready for
project or disturb the status quo. confrontation. 
cost an arm and a leg be extremely
The use of a cart piled high with apples as expensive, informal
a metaphor for a satisfactory but possibly
precarious state of affairs is recorded in give an arm and a leg for pay a high price for. 
various expressions from the late 18th keep someone or something at arm length
century onwards. avoid intimacy or close contact with
1996 Business Age The real test will be someone or something. 
instability in China... Another Tiananmen the long arm of coincidence the far-reaching
Square could really upset the apple cart. power of coincidence. as
the long or strong arm of the law the resources or strategies that can be drawn
police seen as a far-reaching or on or followed. 
intimidating power. arrow of time ortime arrow the direction
as long as your arm very long, informal of travel from past to future in time
put the arm on attempt to force or coerce considered as a physica imension. 
someone to do something. North American a straight arrow an honest or genuine
informal person. North Americanup in arms about protesting angrily about
something. a vulgar slang
1994 Asian Times A lack of checks and go arse over tit fall over in a sudden or
balances... or legal redress for workers have dramatic way. 
trade unions up in arms. kiss my arse: see KISS. 
with open arms with great affection or kiss someone arse: see KISS. 
enthusiasm. lick someone arse: see LICK. 
would give your right arm for be willing to not know your arse from your elbow be
pay a high price for; greatly desire to have totally ignorant or incompetent. 
or do. informala pain in the arse: see PAIN. 
armchair art
an armchair critic a person who knows art for art sake the idea that a work of art
about a subject only by reading or has no purpose beyond itself. 
hearing about it and criticizes without
active experience or first-hand This phrase is the slogan of artists who
knowledge. hold that the chief oronlyaimof aworkof art : is the self-expression of the individual artist
The phrase armchair critic is first recorded ; : who creates it. 
in 1896, but the concept was around at least a decade earlier: in 1886 Joseph Chamberlain be art and part of be an accessory or
sneered at opponents as arm-chair participant in; be deeply involved in. 
politicians. Another common variant is
armchair traveller, meaning someone who Be art and part of was originally a Scottish travels in their imagination only. legal expression: art referred to the bringing
about of an action and part to participationin it. armed
armed at all points prepared in every have something down to a fine art: see F E
particular. ART. 
armed to the teeth carrying a lot of state of the art: see STATE. 
weapons, heavily equipped. article
armpit an article of faith afirmlyheld belief. 
up to your armpits deeply involved in a Article is here used in the sense of a
particular unpleasant situation or statement or item in a summary of religious
enterprise, chiefly US belief. !army 1994 Paul Ormerod The Death of Economics It is
an article of faith in orthodox economics that
you and whose army? used to express free trade between nations is wholly desirable. 
disbelief in someone ability to carry out a
the finished article: see F D. threat, informalthe genuine article: see GENUINE. 
around as
have been around have a lot of varied as and when used to refer to an uncertain
experience of the world, especially a lot of future event. 
sexual experience, informal 1996 She The single most important strategy
you can adopt to boost your energy levels is to
arrow learn to deal with an issue as and when it rears
an arrow in the quiver one of a number of its head. ascendant 10
as if! used to express the speaker belief that behave in a way that is likely to result in
something is very doubtful or unlikely. difficulty for yourself, informal
informalfor the asking used to indicate that someone
as it were in a way used to be less precise. can easily have something if they want it. 
1991 Atlantic jazz audiences permit older 1991 Mark Tully No Full Stops in India Second
musicians to go on suiting up, as it were, until helpings come automatically, and third
they drop. helpings are there for the asking. 
ascendant asleep
in the ascendant rising in power or asleep at the wheel not attentive or alert;
influence. inactive, informal
This expression has been in figurative use The image here is of falling asleep while since the late 16th century. Literally, in driving a car. A North American variant is
technical astrological use, an ascendant is the asleep at the switch, which refers to the
sign of the zodiac that is just rising above the points lever or switch on a railway. 
eastern horizon at a particular moment. 
2003 Guardian Rowling has not been asleep at
the wheel in the three years since the last
ash Potter novel, and am pleased to report thatshe has not confused sheer length with
dust and ashes: see DUST. inspiration. rake over the ashes: see RAKE. 
rise from the ashes: see RISE. a S North American vulgar slang
turn to ashes in your mouth become bitterly bust your ass try very hard to do something. 
disappointing or worthless. chew someone ass reprimand someone
This phrase alludes to the Dead Sea fruit, severely. 
a legendary fruit which looked appetizing cover your ass take steps to protect yourself. 
but turned to smoke and ashes when
someone tried to eat it. The fruit are
drag or haul ass hurry or move fast. 
described in the Travels attributed to the get your ass in gear hurry. 
14th-century writer John de Mandeville. kick some ass or kick someone ass: see
KICK. 1995 Guardian Those who marvelled at the
phenomenal climbing feats of Pedro Delgado kiss ass:see KISS. 
in the 1988 Tour found words such as heroic kiss someone ass: see KISS. 
and Herculean turn to ashes in their mouths
during the probenecid a masking agent no skin off your ass: see K N. 
scandal. not give a rat ass not care at all about
something. ask a pain in the ass: see PAIN. 
ask for the moon: see MOON. 
a piece of ass: see PIECE. ask me another! used to say emphatically
put someone ass in a sling get someone in
that you do not know the answer to aquestion, informal trouble. 
ask no odds: see ODDS. whip or bust someone ass use physical
force to beat someone in a fight. 
a big ask a difficult demand to fulfil. 
informal at
don ask me! used to indicate that you do at it engaged in some activity, typically a
not know the answer to a question and that reprehensible one. 
you are surprised or irritated to be 1993 G. F. Newman Law b Order Oh, don take
questioned, informal me for a complete idiot, Jack. know you re at
it. ask you! an exclamation of shock or
disapproval intended to elicit agreement at that in addition; furthermore used for
from your listener, informal emphasis at the end of a statement. 
1994 Sunday Times The sensitivity to social
change may play its part, but in reality
asking fashion is a business, and a hard-nosed one
be asking for trouble or be asking for it at that. 11 aye
where it at the most fashionable place, get away with you! used to express
possession, or activity, informal scepticism. Scottish
1990 Ellen Feldman Lookingfor Love New York is
where it at, stylewise. far and away: see FAR. out and away: see OUT. atmosphere
an atmosphere that you could cut with a awkward
knife a general feeling of great tension or the awkward age adolescence. 
malevolence. the awkward squad a squad composed of
recruits and soldiers who need furtherattendance training. dance attendance on: see DANCE. 
Shortly before his death Robert Burns is
auld reported to have said, Don let the awkward
squad fire over me. Nowadays, the expression
for auld lang syne for old times sake. is often used to refer to a group of people
who are regarded as tiresome or difficult to
The phrase literally means for old longdeal with. 
since , and is the title and refrain of a song by j! Robert Burns 1788. 
auspice axehave an axe to grind have a private,
under the auspices of with the help, sometimes malign, motive for doing or
support, or protection of. being involved in something. 
Auspice since the late 18th century expression originated in a story told !
almost always used in the plural, comes from by Benjamin Franklin and was used first in the the Latin word auspicium, which means the USA, especially with reference to politics, but act of divination carried out by an auspex in it is now in general use. 
ancient Rome. The auspex observed the flight
of birds in order to foretell future events. If 1997 Times am a non-smoker, and have no
the omens were favourable he was seen as personal axe to grind. 
the protector of the particular enterpriseforetold. aye
the ayes have it the affirmative votes are inauthority the majority. 
have something on good authority have
ascertained something from a reliable Aye is an archaic or dialect word meaning yes , now used in standard speech only when source. voting. Compare with the noes have it
at NO. away
away with something used as an exhortation 2000 Guardian The arguments will continue. 
to overcome or be rid of something. But we think the ayes have it. Bb
B date and who is no longer relevant or
plan B an alternative strategy. useful. 
1999 8 Days And if that doesn work, well, back Bourke the outback. Australian informal
there always Plan B. Bourke is the name of a town in north west New South Wales. babe
babes in the wood inexperienced people in a the back of beyond a very remote or
situation calling for experience. inaccessible place. 
1998 Sanjida Connell Angel Bird This isThe babes in the wood are characters
London, Niall, not some poky wee place in thein an old ballad The Children in the
Wood, which dates from the 16th century,back of beyond. 
The two children are abandoned in the wood back to the drawing board used to indicate
by their wicked uncle who wishes to steal that an idea or scheme has been
their inheritance. The children die of unsuccessful and a new one must be
starvation and robins cover their bodies
devised. with leaves; the uncle and his accomplice
are subsequently brought to justice. An architectural or engineering project is : at its earliest phase when it exists only as a
plan on a drawing board. 
baby
be someone baby of a project be 1991 Discover Even as Humphries fine-tunes
instigated and developed by one particular his system, however, he realizes that NASA
person; be someone creation or special could send him back to the drawing
board. concern, informalback to square one back to the starting
be left holding the baby: see HOLDING. 
point, with no progress made. throw the baby out with the bathwater
discard something valuable along with Square one may be a reference to a board other things that are inessential or game such as Snakes and Ladders, or may
come from the notiona ivision of a football undesirable. : pitch into eight numbered sections for the
This phrase is based on a German saying purpose of early radio commentaries. 
recorded from the early 16th century but not !
introduced into English until the mid 19th back the wrong horse make a wrong or
century, by Thomas Carlyle. He identified it as inappropriate choice. 
German and gave it in the form, You must be on or get off someone back nag or
empty out the bathing-tub, but not the baby along with it. stop nagging someone, informal
by the back door using indirect or dishonest
1998 New Scientist It is easy to throw out the
baby with the bathwater when it comes to means to achieve an objective. 
UFO books—there are some seriously bad get someone back up make someone
titles out there. annoyed or angry. 
This phrase developed as an allusion to
back the way a cat arches its back when it is angry at the back of your mind not consciously ! or threatened. 
or specifically thought of or remembered
but still part of your general awareness. get your own back: see GET. 
back in the day in the past; some time know something like the back of your
ago. hand be entirely familiar with something. 
a back number Qan issue of a periodical not in my back yard: see NOT. 
before the current one. a person on your back in bed recovering from an
whose ideas or methods are out of injury or illness. 13 balance
put your back Into approach a task with 0 1 9 7 Spectator Mr Montgomery was able to
sack Mr Hargreaves, who had evidently not
vigour. brought home the bacon. 
see the back of be rid of an unwanted person
or thing. British informalbadsomeone back is turned someone sbad blood: see BLOOD. 
attention is elsewhere. 
1989 Orson Scott Card Prentice Alvin That a bad quarter of an hour a short but very
prentice of yours look strong enough to dig it unpleasant period of time; an unnerving
hisself, if he doesn lazy off and sleep when experience. 
your back is turned. A bad quarter of an hour is a translation !
take a back seat take or be given a less of the French phrase un mauvais quart 
important position or role. Compare with heure, which has also been current in
in the driver seat at DRIVER. English since the mid 19th century. 
with your back to or up against the wall in
a desperate situation. a bad workman blames his tools: see
WORKMAN. 
backbone be bad news: see S. 
put backbone into someone encourage my bad used to acknowledge responsibility
someone to behave resolutely. for a mistake. North American informal
turn up like a bad penny: see PENNY. 
A a metaphor for firmness of character , !
backbone dates from the mid 19th century. bag
1998 Spectator There is a widespread belief
that if only Mrs Thatcher had still been in No. bag and baggage with all your belongings. 
10, she would have put backbone into Bush a bag of bones an emaciated person or
and got rid of Saddam. animal. Compare with be skin and bone
at K N. back-seata bag or bundle of nerves a person who is
a back-seat driver a passenger in a vehicle
who constantly gives the driver unwanted extremely or tense, informal
advice on how to drive someone who a bag or whole bag of tricks a set of
lectures and criticizes the person actually ingenious plans, techniques, or resources. 
in control of something. informal
be left holding the bag: see be left holdingbackwardsthe baby at HOLDING. 
bend over backwards to do something
make every effort, especially to be fair or in the bag of something desirable as good
helpful, informal as secured, k. US informal
know something backwards be entirely pack your bag: see PACK. familiar with something. bait
1991 William Trevor Reading Turgenev
People who lived in the town knew it back- fish or cut bait: see F 
wards. rise to the bait: see RISE. 
bacon bakersave someone bacon: see save someone a baker dozen thirteen. 
skin at SAVE. This expression arose from the former
bring home the bacon supply material bakers practice of adding an extra loaf to a
provision or support, achieve success. dozen sold to a retailer, this representing the latter profit. informal
This phrase probably derives from themuch earlier save your bacon, recorded from balance
the mid 17th century. In early use bacon alsoturn the balance: see turn the scales at
referred to fresh pork, the meat most readily SCALE. 
available to rural people. weigh something in the balance carefullybald 14
ponder or assess the merits and demerits of 1998 Romesh Gunesekera Sandglass It big
something. business now, you know. You have to be on
the ball: go, go, go all the time. 
The image is of a pair of old-fashioned play ball work willingly with others;
scales with two pans in which the positive and
cooperate, informalnegative aspects of something can be set
against each other. The expanded phrase The literal sense is of play ball is play a
weighed in the balance and found wanting ! team ball game such as baseball or cricket. 
meaning having failed to meet the test of a
particular situation is also found, and is an start the ball rolling set an activity in motion;
allusion to the biblical book of Daniel, where
make a start. such a process formed part of the judgement
made on King Belshazzar. the whole ball of wax everything. North
American informal
a whole new ball game a completely new set
bald of circumstances, informal
as bald as a coot completely bald. The phrase originated in North America, The coot Fulica atra has a broad white where a ball game is a baseball match. 
shield extending up from the base of its bill,
The history of the word bald is somewhat 1989 Looks Making the film was a whole new
obscure, but analogies with other northern ball game... for Kylie. 
European languages suggest a connection
with the idea of having a white patch or ballisticstreak. 
go ballistic fly into a rage, informal
1998 New Scientist The French nuclear
ball industry, local authorities around La Hague
a ball and chain a severe hindrance. and some government agencies went ballistic. 
Viel wasfiercelycondemned for his findings. 
Originally, a ball and chain referred to a
heavy metal ball attached by a chain to the balloon
leg of a prisoner or convict to prevent theirgo down like a lead balloon: see LEAD. escape. 
when or before the balloon goes up when
the ball is in someone court it is that or before the action or trouble starts. 
particular person turn to act next. informal
This expression is a metaphor from tennis The balloon alluded to is probably one
or a similar ball game where different players released to mark the start of an event. 
use particular areas of a marked court. 
1959 Punch The international rules of war are
a ball of fire a person who is full of energy apt to be waived when the balloon goes up. 
and enthusiasm. ballpark
In the early 19th century this phrase was in the ballpark in a particular area or range. 
also used to mean a glass of brandy. informal
behind the eight ball: see G T. The phrase originated in the USA, where a have a ball enjoy yourself greatly; have fun. ! ballpark is a baseball ground. 
informalhave the ball at your feet have your best bamboo
opportunity of succeeding. the bamboo curtain an impenetrable
have a lot on the ball have a lot of ability. political, economic, and cultural barrier
US between China and non-Communistcountries. 
keep the ball rolling maintain the
momentum of an activity. Formed on the pattern of the iron curtain see at IRON, this phrase dates back to the
keep your eye on or take your eye off the 1940s. 
ball keep or fail to keep your attention
focused on the matter in hand. 
on the ball alert to new ideas, methods, and banana
trends, informal banana republic a small tropical state,
15 barkespecially one in central America, get a bang out of derive excitement or
whose economy is regarded as wholly pleasure from. North American informal
dependent on its fruit-exporting trade. 1931 Damon Runyon Guys and Dolls He seems
derogatory to be getting a great bang out of the doings. 
go bananas become extremely angry or go with a bang happen with obvious success. 
excited, go mad. informal
0 1 9 2 Jim Lehrer A Bus of My Own bank
predicted John Erlichman would probably break the bank Qin gambling win more
go bananas when he testified the next money than is held by the bank. cost
day. more than you can afford, informalsecond banana the second most
important person in an organization banner
or activity, informal, chiefly North American under the banner of claiming to support a
top banana the most important person in an particular cause or set of ideas. as part of
organization or activity, informal, chiefly North a particular group or organization. 
Americanbaptism
The two expressions above originated in a baptism of fire a difficult introduction to a
US theatrical slang. The top banana was new job or activity. 
originally the comedian who topped the bill !
in a show, while the second banana was the A baptism of fire was originally a soldier !
supporting comedian. initiation into battle. 1998 Times Opposition spokesmen do not
banana skin normally face a baptism offire,but the Bank of
slip on a banana skin: see SLIP. England unexpected decision... provided
the Shadow Chancellor with an opportunity to
make an early mark. band
when the band begins to play when mattersbecome serious. bar
bar none with no exceptions. 
bandwagon 1866 M. Braddon Lady Mile Your Aspasia is
the greatest picture that ever was painted—jump on the bandwagon join others in bar none. 
doing something or supporting a cause
that is fashionable or likely to be bare
successful. the bare bones the basic facts about
Bandwagon was originally the US term something, without any detail. 
for a large wagon able to carry a band ofmusicians in a procession. bargepole
would not touch someone or somethingwith a bargepole used to express an
bang emphatic refusal to have anything to do
bang for your or the buck value for money;with someone or something, informal
performance for cost. US informal
1995 Desktop Publishing Journal These additions j A bargepole is used to propel a barge and to RunShare... will surely give you the most to fend off obstacles. The equivalent US
productive network, the most bang for your expression substitutes a ten-foot pole. 
buck. bang goes — used to express the sudden or bark
complete destruction of something,bark at the moon: see MOON. 
especially a plan or ambition. 
1895 George Bernard Shaw Letter Somebody bark up the wrong tree pursue a mistaken or
will give a surreptitious performance of it: and misguided line of thought or course of
then bang goes my copyright. action, informal

bang on exactly right. British informal The metaphor is of a dog that has
bang people heads together reprimand ! mistaken the tree in which its quarry has
taken refuge and is barking at the foot of the people severely, especially in the attemptwrong one. 
to make them stop arguing. 
barn 16
1969 Arnold Bennett Forty Years On For off base mistaken. North American informal
sovereign states to conclude agreements on 1947 Time Your Latin American
the basis of a mutual fondness for dogs seems department was off base in its comparison
to me to be barking up the wrong tree. of the Portillo Hotel in Chile with our
someone bark is worse than their bite famous Sun Valley. 
someone is not as ferocious as they appear touch base briefly make or renew contact
or sound. with someone or something, informal1984 Armistead Maupin Babycakes In
A similar association between barking
search of a routine, he touched base with
and biting occurs in the proverb a barking dog never bites, which can be traced back
his launderette, his post office, his nearest
through 13th-century French chascuns
market. 
chiens qui abaie ne mort pas, dogs that bark Base in these three phrases refers to each don bite to Latin canem timidumof the four points in the angles of the
vehementius latrarequam mordere, a timid
diamond in baseball, which a player has to
dog barks more furiously than it bites. reach in order to score a run. barn basic
round Robin Hood barn: see B HOOD. back to basics abandoning complication
and sophistication to concentrate
barred on the most essential aspects of
no holds barred: see HOLD. something. 
barrel Back to basics is often used to suggest the a barrel of laughs a source of fun or moral superiority of the plain and simple, as amusement, informal in a speech made in 1993 by the British
Conservative leader John Major, who1996 Mail on Sunday Seeing so many old people
spearheaded the government campaign for gathered all in one place was hardly a barrel of
the regeneration of basic family and
laughs. educational values in the 1990s. 
get someone over a barrel get someone in a
helpless position; have someone at yourmercy, informal bat
blind as a bat: see BLIND. 
This phrase perhaps refers to the have bats in the or your belfry be eccentric
condition of a person who has been rescued ior crazy, informal
from drowning and is placed over a barrel to clear their lungs of water. This expression refers to the way in which bats in an enclosed space fly about wildly if
scrape the barrel: see SCRAPE. they are disturbed. 
with both barrels with unrestrained force or
emotion, informal c-1901 G. W. Peck Peck Red-Headed Boy They all
thought a crazy man with bats in his belfry
The barrels in question are the two barrels had got loose. 
of a firearm. like a bat out of hell very fast and wildly. 
informal
1995 Patrick McCabe The Dead School Like a bat
barrelhead out of hell that Joe Buck gets on out of the
on the barrelhead: see on the nail at NAIL. apartment and doesn stop running till he
reaches Times Square. barricade not bat an eyelid or eye show no emotional
man or go to the barricades strongly
or other reaction, informal
protest against a government or other
institution or its policy. Satin this sense is perhaps a dialect and
USvariantoftheverbbatemeaning loweror base let down. The variant not blink an eye is also !found. 
get to first base achieve the first step towards
your objective, informal, chiefly North American 1997 James Ryan Dismantling Mr Doyle She
1962 P. G. Wodehouse Service with a Smile She did not bat an eyelid when Eve spelled out the
gives you the feeling that you ll never get to unorthodox details of the accommodation
first base with her. they required. 17 be
off your own bat at your own instigation; 1998 Oldie They endured the hard pounding of
spontaneously. British the Seventies, when Labour battened down
the hatches, and soldiered through the follies 
The bat referred to in this phrase is a of the early Eighties. 
cricket bat. 
battery1995 Colin Bateman Cycle of Violence She
doesn have me doing anything, Marty. It recharge your batteries: see RECHARGE. 
alloffmyownbat. 
battleright off the bat at the very beginning;battle of the giants a contest between two
straight away. North American
pre-eminent parties. 
bated This expression may be a reference to the ! battle between the giants and gods in Greek with bated breath in great suspense; very
mythology. anxiously or excitedly. 
Baited, which is sometimes seen, is battle royal a fiercely contested fight or
a misspelling, since bated in this sense is dispute. 
a shortened form of abated, the idea being 1997 Fred Chappell Farewell, Bound to
that your breathing is lessened under the Leave You The boys told no one about the
influence of extreme suspense. fight... it was a battle royal and went on
from two clock in the afternoon untilsundown. 
bath battle stations used as a command or
an early bath the sending off of a sports signal to military personnel to take up
player during a game. British informal their positions in preparation for battle. 
chiefly US
The allusion is to the bath or shower
taken by players at the end of a match. half the battle an important step towards
achieving something. 
take a bath suffer a heavy financial loss. a losing battle: see LOSING. 
informal1997 Bookseller When the yen drops in value, a pitched battle: see PITCHED. 
as it is doingrightnow, we take a bath. There is a running battle: see RUNNING. 
no way to change the prices fast enough. bay
baton bay for blood demand punishment or
pass or hand on the baton hand over a retribution. 
particular duty or responsibility. bring someone or something to bay trap or
In athletics, the baton is the short stick or corner a person or animal being hunted or
rod passed from one runner to the next in a chased. 
relay race. The related phrases pick up or take This phrase was originally a medieval
up the baton mean accept a duty or hunting term, referring to the position of the responsibility. Compare with hand on the quarry when it is cornered by the baying
torch at TORCH. hounds. Ananimalcorneredinthiswayissaid !
to stand at bay. under the baton of of an orchestra or choir
conducted by. hold or keep someone or something atbay prevent someone or something from
The baton here is the rod used by theconductor. approaching or having an effect. be
batten -to-be of the future. 
batten down the hatches prepare for a 1993 Mother 8 Baby Many mums-to-be
difficulty or crisis. report that smallfrequentsnacks are
easier to keep down than three large meals
Batten down the hatches was originally a day. 
a nautical term meaning make a ship be there for someone be available to support
hatches secure with gratings and tarpaulins 
or comfort someone who is experiencingin expectation of stormy weather. difficulties or adversities. 
bead 18
the be-all and end-all a feature of an activity know how many beans make five be
or a way of life that is of greater importance intelligent; have your wits about you. British
than any other, informal informal
not have a bean be penniless, informal
bead Bean was an early 19th-century slang
draw or get a bead on take aim at with a term for a golden guinea or sovereign. In the gun. chiefly North American sense of a coin , it now survives only in this
1994 Ontario Out of Doors Few moose will pose j phrase. 
majestically right at the water edge while
you draw a bead on them. spill the beans: see SPILL. 
beam beara beam in your eye a fault that is greater in bear the brunt of: see BRUNT. 
yourself than in the person you are finding grin and bear it: see GRIN. 
fault with. have your cross to bear: see CROSS. 
This phrase comes from Matthew 7:3: like a bear with a sore head of a person very
Why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy irritable. British informal
brother eye, but considerest not the beam
that is in thy own eye? For a mote in
loaded for bear fully prepared for any
someone eye, see MOTE. eventuality, typically a confrontation or
challenge. North American informal
broad in the beam: see BROAD. 
The image here may be of a hunting gun off or way off beam on the wrong track; loaded and ready to shoot a bear. 
mistaken, informal
Originally, this phrase referred to the beard
radio beam or signal used to guide aircraft. 
beard the lion in his den or lair confront
1997 Anthony Barnett This Time sample or challenge someone on their own
the press coverage to illustrate how large ground. 
sections of the Fourth Estate were way off
beam in their conviction that voters want phrase developed partly from the
the country steered back towards Great idea of being daring enough to take a lion
Englishness. by the beard and partly from the use of beard 
as a verb to mean face , i. to face a lion in
on your beam ends near the end of your his den. resources; desperate. 
The beam referred to here is one of beatthe main horizontal transverse timbers
beat a hasty retreat withdraw, typically
of a wooden ship; compare with broad in the beam at BROAD. The phrase originated as
in order to avoid something unpleasant. 
the nautical term on her beam ends, and was In former times, a drumbeat could be
used of a ship that had heeled over on its side used to keep soldiers in step while they were and was almost capsizing. retreating. 
beat about the bush discuss a matter
bean without coming to the point; be ineffectual
full of beans lively; in high spirits, informal and waste time. 
This phrase was originally used by people This phrase is a metaphor which
who work with horses, and referred to the originated in the shooting or netting of birds; good condition of a horse fed on beans. compare with beat the bushes below. 
give someone beans scold or deal severely 1992 Barry Unsworth Sacred Hunger don t
with a person, informal want to beat about the bush. Mr Adams is
threatening to leave us. 
a hill or row of beans something of little
importance or value, informal beat someone at their own game use
1999 SL Cape Town think that what your someone own methods to outdo them in
friends and family think shouldn amount to their chosen activity. 
a hill of beans. beat your breast: see BREAST. 
19 bedbeat the bushes search thoroughly. NorthbeautifulAmerican informal
the beautiful people Qfashionable,
This expression originates from the way in glamorous, and privileged people, in
which hunters walkthrough undergrowth the 1960s hippies. 
wielding long sticks which are used to force 01995 Singapore: Rough Guide The coolest
birdsoranimalsoutintotheopenwherethey address in town, and a magnet for the
can be shot or netted. beautiful people. 
beat the clock perform a task quickly or the body beautiful an ideal of physicalbeauty. 
within a fixed time limit. 1992 Mother Jones About 75,000 women a year
beat the daylights out of: see DAYLIGHT. elect to have cosmetic surgery, spurred on by
beat the drum for: see DRUM. ubiquitous images of the body beautiful. 
beat your or the meat of a man
masturbate, vulgar slang beaver
beat the pants off prove to be vastly superior work like a beaver work steadily and
to. informal industriously, informal
1990 Paul Auster The Music of Chance Not bad,i The beaver is referred to here because
kid, Nashe said. You beat the pants off me. j of the industriousness with which it
beat a path to someone door of a large constructs the dams necessary for its aquatic
dwellings. The image is similarly conjured
number of people hasten to make contact up by the phrase beaver away meaning
with someone regarded as interesting or work hard. inspiring. 
This phrase developed from the idea of a beck
large number of people trampling down
vegetation to make a path: compare with off at someone beck and call always having to
the beaten track at BEATEN. be ready to obey someone orders
immediately. 
beat the system succeed in finding a means
Beck in the sense of a significant gesture of getting round rules, regulations, or other of command comes from the verb beck, a
means of control. shortened form of beckon. It is now found
beat someone to it succeed in doing mainly in this phrase. 
something or getting somewhere before
someone else, to their annoyance. 
bed
if you can beat them, join them if you are bed and breakfast overnight
unable to outdorivalsin some endeavour, accommodation and breakfast next
you might as well cooperate with them and morning as offered by hotels etc. 
gain whatever advantage possible by doing designatingfinancialtransactions in
so. humorous. which shares are sold and then bought
miss a beat: see MISS. back the next morning. 
to beat the band in such a way as to surpass a bed of nails a problematic or uncomfort all competition. North American informal able situation. 
1995 Patrick McCabe The Dead School He was
polishing away to beat the band. A bed of nails was originally a board with !
nails pointing out of it, lain on by Eastern
fakirs and ascetics. beaten
beaten or pipped at the post defeated at a bed of roses a situation or activity that is
the last moment. comfortable or easy. 
get out of bed on the wrong side be bad The post alluded to here is the marker at tempered al ay long. the end of a race. 
in bed with having sexual intercourse
off the beaten track or path Qui or into with, in undesirably close association
an isolated place, unusual. with, informal
1992 lain Banks The Crow Road Your Uncle 02000 Snowboard UK Jackson lies like an
Hamish... She looked troubled. He a bit off oasis of culture and good coffee in a state that
the beaten track, that boy. is otherwisefirmlyin bed with gun culture. 
bedpost 20you have made your bed and must lie in it
you must accept the consequences of your
beg
own actions. beg the question raise a point that has not
been dealt with; invite an obvious
bedpost question, assume the truth of an
between you and me and the bedpost or argument or of a proposition to be proved,
the gatepost or the wall in strict without arguing it. 
confidence, informal The original meaning of the phrase beg
the question belongs to the field of logic and ;
The bedpost, gatepost, or wall is seen as is a translation of Latin petitio principii,
marking the boundary beyond which the literally meaning Maying claim to a principle , confidence must not go. i. assume the truth of something that
ought to be proved first. For manytraditionalists this remains the only correct
bedside meaning, but far commoner in English today ;
bedside manner a doctor approach or is the first sense here, invite an obvious
attitude to a patient. question. 
1993 Bill Moyers Healing & the Mind Are youust talking about the old-fashioned bedside
manner of a doctor who comes around and beggar
visits you when you need him? beggar belief or description be too
extraordinary to be believed or described. 
bee beggar on horseback a formerly poor person
the bee knees something or someone made arrogant or corrupt through
outstandingly good, informal achieving wealth and luxury. 
The bee knees was first used to refer to !
Compare with the mid 17th-century
something small and insignificant, but itproverb set a beggar on horseback and he ll 
quickly developed its current, completely
ride to the devil, meaning that a person not opposite meaning. 
used to power will use it unwisely. 
have a bee in your bonnet have an obsessive beggars can be choosers people with no
preoccupation with something, informal other options must be content with what is
This expression, along with have bees in offered, proverb
the head or bees in the brain, was first used to refer to someone who was regarded as crazy beggingor eccentric. 
go begging Qof an article be available of an opportunity not be taken. beeline
make a beeline for go rapidly and directly beginner
towards. beginner luck good luck supposedly
experienced by a beginner at a particularO The phrase refers to the straight line
supposedly taken instinctively by a bee
game or activity. 
returning to its hive. beginning
1997 Bookseller And when he heard that people the beginning of the end the event or
might like him to sign copies of his new development to which the conclusion or
novel... he cut the small talk and made a failure of something can be traced. 
beeline for the stall. 
1992 Norman Schwartzkopf It Doesn Take a
been Hero heard about D-Day on the radio. The
announcer quoted Ohio governor John
been there, done that: see THERE. Bricker now-famous line that this was the
beginning of the end of the forces of evil. beer
beer and skittles amusement. British bejeSUS informal
This phrase comes from the proverb life beat the bejesus out of someone hit
isn all beer and skittles. The game of skittles someone very hard or for a long time. 
is used as a prime example of a form of light- scare the bejesus out of someone frighten
hearted entertainment. 
someone very much. 21 bend
2001 GQThis place is going to scare the
bejesus out of the fuddy-duddy Sloaney-Pony bellyset. go belly up go bankrupt, informal 
Bejesus is an alteration of the exclamation The implied comparison is with a dead
by Jesus! It is often found in its Anglo-Irish fish or other animal floating upside down in !
form bejasus or bejabers. the water. 1998 Times: Weekend The single currency
bell could well go belly-up within two or threeyears. 
bell, book, and candle a formula for laying a
curse on someone. 
bellyful
This expression alludes to the closing have a bellyful of become impatient after
words of the rite of excommunication, prolonged experience of someone or
Do to the book, quench the candle, ring something, informal
the bell , meaning that the service book
is closed, the candle put out, and the
passing bell rung, as a sign of spiritual below
death. below stairs in the basement of a house, in
particular as the part occupied by servants. 
bell the cat take the danger of a shared British dated
enterprise upon yourself. 
Bell the cat alludes to the fable in which belt
mice or rats have the idea of hanging a bell below the belt unfair or unfairly; not in
aroundthecat snecksoastohavewarningof keeping with the rules. 
its approach, the only difficulty being to find oneof their number willing to undertake the boxing a blow below the belt is a low, task. and therefore unlawful, blow. 
bells and whistles attractive additional belt and braces of a policy or action
features or trimmings, informal providing double security by using
two means to achieve the same end. 
The bells and whistles originally referred British
to were those found on old fairground
organs. Nowadays, the phrase is often used in This meaning developed from the idea of computing jargon to mean attractive but ! a literal belt and braces holding up a pair of superfluous facilities. loose-fitting trousers. 

saved by the bell: see A D. 2002 Digital Photography Made Easy Oddly, the
as clear or sound as a bell perfectly clear or manual is also on CD, which seems a bit belt
and braces though useful if you lose the
sound. original. 1993 Independent We spent a few thousand on
redecoration, but basically the place was tighten your belt cut your expenditure; live
sound as a bell. more frugally. 
give someone a bell telephone someone. under your belt of food or drink
consumed. safely or satisfactorilyBritish informal
achieved, experienced, or acquired. 
ring a bell revive a distant recollection;
sound familiar, informal bend
with bells on enthusiastically. North American bend someone ear talk to someone,
informal especially with great eagerness or in order
1989 Mary Gordon The Other Side So, to ask a favour, informal
everybody waiting for you with bells on. bend your elbow drink alcohol. Northbelle American
belle of the ball the most admired and bend over backwards: see BACKWARDS. 
successful woman on a particular occasion. round the bend or twist crazy; mad. informal
1998 Spectator She combines a fondness for
Thebeeofthebawasoriginallythegirl holidays in Switzerland with an amiable
or woman regarded as the most beautiful
husband... who saves herfromgoing
and popular at a dance. 
completely round the bend. 
bended 22
bended besetting
on bended knee kneeling, especially when besetting sin a fault to which a person or
pleading or showing great respect. institution is especially prone; a
characteristic weakness. Bended was the original past participle of bend, but in Middle English it was superseded The verb beset literally means surround
in general use by bent. It is now archaic and with hostile intent , so the image is of a sin
survives only in this phrase. besieging or pressing in upon a person. 
1974 Donal Scannell Mother Knew Best Motherbenefit said vanity was a besetting sin which Amy
give someone the benefit of — explain or resented, to say the least of it. 
recount to someone at length often used
ironically when someone pompously or beside
impertinently assumes that their beside yourself overcome with worry, grief,
knowledge or experience is superior to or anger; distraught. 
that of the person to whom they aretalking. 
1999 Stage Our courses are delivered by 2 best
current TV personalities who will give you the best bib and tucker: see BIB. 
benefit of their 6 years experience. the best thing since sliced bread: see BREAD. 
the benefit of the doubt a concession that put your best foot forward: see FOOT. 
someone or something must be regarded as with the best will in the world: see WILL. 
correct or justified, if the contrary has notthe best of both worlds: see WORLD. 
been proved. the best of British used to wish someone well
Benjamin in an enterprise, especially when you are
a Benjamin portion or mess the largest almost sure it will be unsuccessful, informal
share or portion. This phrase is an abbreviation of the best of British luck to you. 
In the Bible, Benjamin was the youngest
son of the Jewish patriarch Jacob. When
acob sons encountered their long-lost
give someone or something best admit the
brother Joseph in Egypt, where he had superiority of; give way to. British
become a high official, they failed to 1990 Birds Magazine Hefinallydecided to give
recognize him, but Joseph generously us best and took himself off. 
entertained them: And he took and sent make the best of it derive what limited
messes servings of food unto them from
before him: but Benjamin smesswasfivetimesadvantage you can from something
so much as any of their Genesis 43:34. unsatisfactory or unwelcome, use
resources as well as possible. The first sense is often found in the form bent make the best of a bad job, meaning do
bent out of shape angry or agitated. North something as well as you can under difficult American informal : circumstances. 
1994 David Spencer Alien Nation 6: Passing
Fancy Max Corigliano was there... and bent your best bet the most favourable option
out of shape about having been made to wait available in particular circumstances. 
so long. six of the best a caning as a punishment,
berth traditionally with six strokes of the cane. 
give someone or something a wide berth Six of the best was formerly a common
stay away from someone or something. punishment in boys schools, but it is
now chiefly historical in its literal sense
Berth is a nautical term which originally and tends to be used figuratively or !
referred to the distance that ships should humorously. 
keep away from each other or from the shore, rocks, etc.in order to avoid a collision. Therefore, the literal meaning of the bet
expression is steer a ship well clear of
something while passing it. 
all bets are off the outcome of a particular
situation is unpredictable, informal23 bicky
don bet on it used to express doubt about go one better narrowly surpass a previous
an assertion or situation, informal effort or achievement. narrowly outdo
another person. 
you can bet your boots or bottom dollar or
no better than should or g to belife you may be absolutely certain, informal
regarded as sexually promiscuous or of
bet the farm risk everything that you own on doubtful moral character. 
a bet, investment, or enterprise. North
This phrase dates back to the early 17thAmerican informal
century. Used typically of a woman, it is now a safe bet a certainty. rather dated. 
A safe bet originally referred to a horse
that was confidently expected to win a race. 1998 Spectator She no better than she ought
to be. British mothers of my generation... 
2002 Observer It is a safe bet that as the often used that enigmatic phrase. They would
Western world gets fatter, the people on its use it about female neighbours of whom they
television screens will continue to get thinner. disapproved, or women in low-cut dresses on
television. better
against your better judgement: seeyour better half your husband or wife. 
JUDGEMENT. humorous
the — the better used to emphasize the seen better days: see DAY. 
importance or desirability of the quality or so much the better: see 
thing specified. 
1986 Patrick Leigh Fermor Between the Woods & betting
the Water He had a passion for limericks, the the betting is that it is likely that, informal
racier the better. 
better the devil you know it wiser to deal between
with an undesirable but familiar person or between the devil a the deep blue sea: see
situation than to risk a change that might DEVIL. 
lead to a situation with worse difficulties or between a rock a a hard place: see K. 
a person whose faults you have yet to
discover. betwixtbetwixt and between neither one thing nor
0 This phrase is a shortened form of thethe other, informal
proverb better the devil you know than the
devil you don know. Betwixt is now poetic or archaic and is
seldom found outside this phrase. 
better late than never it preferable for
something to happen or be done belatedly
than not at all. beyond
better safe than sorry it wiser to be the back of beyond: see B A K. 
cautious and careful than to be hasty or it beyond me it too astonishing, puzzling,
rash and so do something that you may etc. for me to understand or explain, informal
later regret. bib
Apparently the expression is quite recent your best bib and tucker your best clothes. 
in this form mid 20th century; better be sure informal
than sorry is recorded from the mid 19th
century. Bib and tucker originally referred to
certain items of women clothing. A bib
1998 New Scientist The meeting is to be is a garment worn over the upper front
commended for taking a better safe than : part of the body g. the bib of an apron,
sorry attitude, and drawing up a baseline list and a tucker was a decorative piece of lace
of measures to be put in place when disease formerly worn on a woman bodice. 
breaks out. 
the better to — so as to — better. stick or poke your bib in interfere. Australian
1986 Peter Mathiessen Men lives Francis ran & New Zealand informal
both motors with their housings off, the better
to tinker with them. bicky
get the better of win an advantage over big bickies a large sum of money Australian
someone; defeat or outwit someone. informalbide 24
j Bickies is an abbreviation of biscuits. 1998 Sunday Telegraph The notion that
someone outside the so-called Big Four —the
1981 Canberra Times Appearance money is ministerial group which meets before Cabinet
another claim which we think will —might be given such status is uplifting. 
succeed... Just showing up is worth big big white chief: see CHIEF. 
bickies. give someone the big reject someone,
typically in an insensitive or dismissive
bide way. British informal
bide your time wait quietly for a good
opportunity. The in the phrase is from elbow: give
someone the big elbow has the same
Bide in the sense of await is now only meaning. 
found in this expression. It has been
superseded by abide in most of its other make it big become very successful or
senses. 
famous, informal
1991 Gillian Slovo The Betrayal And so he bided talk big talk confidently or boastfully, informal
his time, waiting, plotting, planning, looking
for the signs that would be good for him. think big be ambitious, informal
too big for your boots conceited, informal
big bike
Big brother: see BROTHER. get off your bike become annoyed. Australian &
the big C: see C. New Zealand informal
a big cheese an important and influential 1939 Xavier Herbert Capricornia tell you saw
person, informal no-one. Don get off your bike, son. —I knowyou re tellin lies. 
Other versions of this phrase substitute
on your bike! g away! a k action! British
fish, gun, noise, shot, or wheel for cheese. 
These are mainly self-explanatory, with the informal
exception of cheese itself, which is ofSense 2 became a catchphrase in 1980s
doubtful origin but may be from Persian and
Britain, when it was used as an exhortation to Urdu chTz meaning thing. As a phrase, big
the unemployed to show initiative in their
cheese seems to have originated in early
attempt to find work. It was taken from a
20th-century US slang, as did big noise. Bigspeech by the Conservative politician
wheel in this metaphorical sense as opposed
Norman Tebbit in which he said of his
to the fairground ride known as a Ferrisunemployed father: He did not riot, he got
wheel and big shot are similarly US in origin
on his bike and looked for work. 
mid 20th century. Big fish may haveconnotations either of something it is
desirable for you to catch or of the
metaphorical expression a big fish in a small bill
pond. bill and coo exchange caresses or affection-ate words; behave or talk in a very loving
big deal an important or impressive event. or sentimental way. informal, dated
used as an ironic exclamation to indicate
The image is of two doves, a long that you do not think something is as established symbol of mutual love. 
important or impressive as another person
has suggested, informal a clean bill of health a declaration or
the big five a name given by hunters to the confirmation that someone is healthy
five largest and most dangerous African or something is in good condition. 
mammals: rhinoceros, elephant, buffalo,
n the mid 18th century, a bill of health
lion, and leopard. was an official certificate given to the master the big lie a gross distortion or misrep- of a ship on leaving port; if clean, it certified resentation of the facts, especially when that there was no infection either in the port used as a propaganda device by a politician or on board the vessel. 
or official body. 
fit or fill the bill be suitable for a particular
the big smoke QLondon. British informal any purpose. 
large town, chiefly Australianfl7in this context is a printed list of items the big Three, Four, etc. the dominant group
on a theatrical programme or advertisement, of three, four, etc. informal
25 bit
foot the bill be responsible for paying for finger up at someone as a sign of contempt
something. or anger. US informal
sell someone a bill of goods deceive or 1994 Washington Post Magazine We could
swindle someone, usually by persuading simultaneously honour America, break the
them to accept something untrue or law and flip the bird to all the do-gooders. 
undesirable. give someone or get the bird boo or jeer at
someone orbe booed or jeered at. British
A bill of goods is a consignment of informal
merchandise. This phrase first appeared in early 19th 1968 Globe & Mail Toronto There was no century theatrical slang as the big bird,
production bonus... We were sold a bill of meaning a goose. This was because the
goods. hissing of geese could be compared to the
top or head the bill be the main performer audience hissing at an act or actor of which or act in a show, play, etc. it disapproved. 
have a bird be very shocked or agitated. North
billy-o American informal
like billy-o very much, hard, or strongly. 1992 Globe & Mail Toronto The Washington
British informal press corps would have a bird if the president 1995 John Banville Athena This skin tone is the to-be appointed his wife to a real job. 
effect of cigarettes, suspect, for she is a great kill two birds with one stone: see KILL. 
smoker... going at the fags like billy-o. 
a little bird told me used as a teasing way of
saying that you do not intend to divulge
bird how you came to know something. 
the bird has flown the person you are strictly for the birds not worth
looking for has escaped or gone away. consideration; unimportant, informal
a bird in hand something that you have
This expression was originally US army
securely or are sure of. ! slang. Itmaybeanallusiontotheway in which This phrase refers to the proverb a bird in birds eat the droppings of horses and cattle. 
hand is worth two in the bush, current in
English since the mid 15th century. birthday
a bird of passage someone who is always in your birthday suit naked, humorousmoving on. 
Literally, a bird of passage is a migrant
biscuitbird. have had the biscuit be no longer good for
anything; be done for. Canadian informal
a bird  -eye view a general view from above. 1994 Equinox thought had the biscuit. 
was more than 12 kilometres from camp,
the birds and the bees basic facts about sex
didn have a coat... and it was about
and reproduction as told to a child, informal 40 below. 
birds of a feather people with similar tastes,
take the biscuit: see TAKE. interests, etc. 
This phrase comes from the proverb birds bit
of a feather flock together, which has been a bit much somewhat excessive or
current in this form since the late 16th
century. Its origins may ultimately lie in theunreasonable. 
Apocrypha: the birds will resort unto their a bit of all right a pleasing person or thing,
like Ecclesiasticus 27:9. especially a woman regarded sexually. 
British informal
do bird serve a prison sentence. British bit of fluff or skirt or stuff a woman
informal regarded in sexual terms. British informal
In this phrase brd comes from rhyming1937 W. Somerset Maugham Theatre It was
slang birdlime time. strangely flattering for a woman to be treated
as a little bit of fluff that you just tumbled on to
early bird: see EARLY. abed. 
flip someone the bird stick your middle bit of rough: see ROUGH. 
bite 26
bit on the side a person with whom you bite off more than you can chew take on a
are unfaithful to your partner. a commitment you cannot fulfil. 
relationship involving being unfaithful to bite your tongue make a desperate effort to
your partner. money earned outside
avoid saying something. 
your normal job. informalput the bite on blackmail; extort money
bits and pieces or bobs an assortment of from. North American & Australian informal
small or unspecified items. 1955 Ray Lawler Summer of the Seventeenth Dol
do your bit make a useful contribution to an Your money runnin out you know you can t
effort or cause, informal put the bite on me any more. 
take a bite out of reduce by a significant
The exhortation to do your bit was much j! used during World War 1, but the expression amount, informal
was current in the late 19th century. biter
get the bit between your teeth begin to the biter bit or bitten a person who has done
tackle a problem or task in a determined or harm has been harmed in a similar way. 
independent way. Biter was a late 17th-century term for a
The metal bit in a horse mouth should lie fraudster or trickster. In this sense it now
on the fleshy part of its gums; if a headstrong survives only in this phrase. 
horse grasps the bit between its teeth it can
evade the control of the reins and its rider. 2000 Locus The most common plot device
in Lee stories is the classic biter bitten 
to bits very much, informal resolution. 
1998 Times A succession of elderly ladies bitten
explained how, as young women, they hadfancied him to bits. be bitten by the bug: see BUG. 
could have bitten my tongue off usedto convey that you profoundly and
bite immediately regret having said something. 
bite someone head off respond curtly or once bitten, twice shy: see ONCE. 
angrily. a bite at the cherry: see CHERRY. bitter
bite the big one die. North American informal a bitter pill: see PILL. 
1996 Tom Clancy Executive Orders The Premier to the bitter end persevering to the end,
of Turkmenistan bit the big one, supposedly whatever the outcome. 
an automobile accident. 
bite the bullet face up to doing something black
difficult or unpleasant; stoically avoid beat someone black and blue hit someone
showing fear or distress. so severely that they are covered in bruises. 
This phrase dates from the days before
be in someone black books be in disfavour
anaesthetics, when wounded soldiers were with someone. 
given a bullet or similar solid object to clench Although a black book was generally an
between their teeth when undergoing
official book in which misdemeanours and
surgery. 
their perpetrators were noted down, this
1998 Joyce Holms Bad Vibes Once he phrase perhaps originated in the black accepted it as inevitable he usually bit the bound book in which evidence of monastic
bullet and did what was required of him with a scandals and abuses was recorded by Henry
good grace. VIH commissioners in the 1530s, before the
suppression of the monasteries. bite the dust Qbe killed, fail, informal
bite the hand that feeds you deliberately beyond the black stump: see STUMP. 
hurt or offend a benefactor; act black box an automatic apparatus, the
ungratefully. internal operations of which are
1994 Warren Farrell The Myth of Male Power mysterious to non-experts. 
When this is combined with the fact that
women watch more TV in every time slot, Black does not refer to the colour of the
shows can afford to bite the hand that feeds ! device but to the arcane nature of its
them. functions. Originally Royal Air Force slang for ;27 bleeds
a navigational instrument in an aircraft, the A stone at Blarney Castle near Cork in
phrase is now used in aviation specifically to Ireland is said to give the gift of persuasive
refer to the flight recorder. speech to anyone who kisses it; from this
comes the verb blarney, meaning talk in a
a black mark against someone something flattering way. 
that someone has done that is disliked ordisapproved of by other people. blast
T literal meaning of the phrase is a a blast from the past something powerfully
black cross or spot marked against the name nostalgic, especially an old pop song. 
of a person who has done something wrong, jinformal
the black sheep a person considered to have 1997 Time Out N. Y. Tonight act is a tribute to
Curtis Mayfield, featuring three blasts from
brought discredit upon a family or other
the past: The Impressions... The Stylistics and
group; a bad character. The Dramatics. 
a black spot a place that is notorious for
something, especially a high crime or blaze
accident rate. blaze a trail be the first to do something
1992 Radio Times Jonathon Porritt meets the and so set an example for others to
green warriors who are spearheading follow. campaigns to clean up some of the world  
worst pollution black spots. Blaze in this sense comes ultimately from in the black not owing any money; solvent. an Old Norse noun meaning a white mark on a horse face. In its literal sense, blazing a
in black and white Qin writing or in print, tra7 refers to the practice of making white
and regarded as more reliable than by marks on trees by chipping off bits of their
word of mouth, in terms of clearly bark, thereby indicating your route to those :
defined opposing principles or issues. who are following you. 
not as black as you are painted not as bad as like blazes very fast or forcefully, informal
you are said to be. informal
Blazes in this context refers to the flames The proverb the devil is not as black as he of hell; go to blazes! is a dated equivalent of is painted, first recorded in English in the mid go to hell!
16th century, was used as a warning not to
base your fears of something on exaggerated jreports. blazingwith guns blazing: see GUN. 
blank bleeda blank cheque unlimited scope, especiallybleed someone dry or white drain
to spend money. someone of all their money or resources.
A blank cheque is literally one in which
the amount of money to be paid has not been ; Since the late 17th century bleeding has
filled in by the payer. been a metaphor for extorting money from
someone. White refers to the physiological
draw a blank elicit no response; be effect of losing blood. 
unsuccessful. 1982 William Haggard The Mischief-Makers Her
husband had been a wealthy man, the lady  
Abancwas originally a lottery ticket that solicitors sharp and ruthless, and her husband did not win a prize. 
had been bled white to get rid of her. 
firing blanks of a man infertile, informal
bleeds
blanket my heart bleeds for you sympathize very
born on the wrong side of the blanket deeply with you. 
illegitimate, dated This image was used by Chaucer and
a wet blanket: see WET. Shakespeare to express sincere anguish. 
Nowadays, the phrase most often indicates
blarney the speaker belief that the person referred to does not deserve the sympathy they are
have kissed the blarney stone be eloquent seeking. 
and persuasive. 
bless 28bless blind someone with science use special or
not have a penny to bless yourself with: see
technical knowledge and vocabulary to
confuse someone. PENNY. go it blind act recklessly. 
blessing rob blind: see B. 
a blessing in disguise an apparent turn a blind eye pretend not to notice. 
misfortune that eventually has good
This phrase is said to be a reference toresults. Admiral Horatio Nelson 1758-1805, who
count your blessings: see T. lifted a telescope to his blind eye at the
a mixed blessing: see X D. Battle of Copenhagen 1801, thereby
ensuring that he failed to see his superior  
signal to discontinue the action. A less usual blind version, referring directly to this story, is turn 
a blind alley a course of action that does not a Nelson eye. 
deliver any positive results. 
1997 New Scientist The next person looking
for the same information has to go through
blinderplay a blinder: see PLAY. 
the process all over again—even if 1000
people have already been up the same blind
alleys. blinding
effing and blinding: see F F G. 
as blind as a bat having bad eyesight. 
informalblink
This expression probably arose from the in the blink of an eye very quickly, informal
bat nocturnal habits and its disorientated 1995 Daily Mail It also has an unnerving way of
flutterings if disturbed by day. The poor flipping overfromcomedy to tragedy, or from
eyesight of bats and less frequently, moles tragedy to comedy, in the blink of an eye. 
has been proverbial since the late 16thcentury. 
on the blink of a machine not workingproperly; out of order, informal
a blind bit of — the smallest bit of—; no — at
all. informal block
1995 Patrick McCabe The Dead School Not that it a chip off the old block: see P. 
made a blind bit of difference what they a new kid on the block a newcomer to a
thought, considering the way their lives were
particular place or sphere of activity, informal
about to go. 
a blind date a social meeting, usually with : This phrase was originally American: the
the object of starting a romance, between block referred to is a block of buildings
between streets. 
two people who have not met each other
before. 1998 Times Andrew Flintoff has displaced Ben
the blind leading the blind a situation in Hollioake as the new kid on the block. 
which the ignorant or inexperienced are have been around the block a few times of
instructed or guided by someone equally a person have a lot of experience. North
ignorant or inexperienced. American informal
This phrase alludes to the proverb when on the block for sale at auction, chiefly North
the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into American
the ditch, quoting Matthew 15:14. 
The block in this phrase was the platform a blind spot an area into which you cannot on which, in former times, a slave stood to be auctioned. see. an aspect of something that
someone knows or cares little about. put the blocks on prevent from proceeding. 
These general senses appear to have A block of wood or other material placed developed from a mid 19th-century
in front of a wheel prevents forwardcricketing term for the spot of ground inmovement. 
front of a batsman where a ball pitched by
the bowler leaves the batsman undecided
put your head or neck on the block putwhether to play forward to it or back. 
your position or reputation at risk by29 blot
proceeding with a particular course of A North American variant of this
action, informal ! expression isre geftng bloodoutofaturnip. 

This phrase alludes to the block of wood make your blood boil infuriate you. 
on which a condemned person was formerly beheaded. make your blood curdle fill you withhorror. 
make your blood run cold horrify you. 
blood The previous three phrases all come from
blood and guts violence and bloodshed, the medieval physiological scheme of the
especially in fiction, informal four humours in the human body
melancholy, phlegm, blood, and choler. blood and iron military force rather than Under this scheme blood was the hot, moist
diplomacy. element, so the effect of horror or fear in
Blood and iron is a translation of German making the blood run cold or curdling
Blut und Eisen, a phrase particularly solidifying it was to make it unable to fulfil
associated with a speech made by the its proper function of supplying the body
German statesman Bismarck 1815-98 in the with vital heat or energy. The blood boiling
Prussian House of Deputies in 1886. was a supposedly dangerous overreaction to strong emotion. 
blood and thunder unrestrained and violent
action or behaviour, especially in sport or new or young blood new or younger
fiction, informal members of a group, especially those
admitted as an invigorating force. Blood and thunder is often used to
describe sensational literature, and in the late someone blood is up someone is in a
19th century gave rise to penny bloods as a fighting mood. 
term for cheap sensational novels. sweat blood: see SWEAT. 
blood is thicker than water family loyalties taste blood achieve an early success that
are stronger than other relationships. stimulates further efforts. 
there is bad blood between — there is long blood on the carpet used to refer in anstanding hostility between the parties
exaggerated way to a serious disagreementmentioned. 
or its aftermath. 2001 Hugh Collins No Smoke There are
1984 Times The last thing want now is blood occasional square-gos sometimes, but there  
on the boardroom carpet. no bad blood between rival gangs. 
blood, sweat, and tears extremely hard
work; unstinting effort. bloodyO May 1940 Winston Churchill made a
bloody or bloodied but unbowed proud of
speech in the House of Commons in which he what you have achieved despite having
declared : have nothing to offer but blood, suffered great difficulties or losses. 
toil, tears, and sweat. bloom
blood will tell family characteristics cannot the bloom is off the rose something is no
be concealed, proverb longer new, fresh, or exciting. North American
first blood the first point or advantagegained in a contest. blot
blot your copybook tarnish your goodFirst blood is literally the first shedding of reputation. British blood , especially in a boxing match or
formerly in duelling with swords. A copybook was an exercise book with
examples of handwriting for children to copy have blood on your hands be responsible for as they practised their own writing. 
the death of someone. 
a blot on the escutcheon something that
in cold blood: see COLD. 
tarnishes your reputation. 
in your blood ingrained in or fundamental to
An escutcheon was a family heraldic
your character. shield, and so also a record and symbol of its like getting blood out of a stone extremely honour. 
difficult and frustrating. 
blouse 30
a blot on the landscape something ugly blow something sky-high destroy
that spoils the appearance of a place; something completely in an explosion. 
an eyesore. informal
1962 Listener Charabancs and monstrous blow your top lose your temper. 
hordes of hikers are blots upon the landscape. 
Two, chiefly North American, variants are blow your lid and blow your stack. blouse
big girl blouse a weak, cowardly, or blow up in your face of an action, plan, or
oversensitive man. British informal situation go drastically wrong with
damaging effects to yourself. blow blow the whistle on: see WHISTLE. 
blow someone away kill, destroy, or
blow with the wind act according todefeat someone, have a very strong
effect on someone, informal prevailing circumstances rather than a
01998 Times It blows me away the way she consistent plan. 
a 13-year-old is already moving through her soften or cushion the blow make it easier
life. to cope with a difficult change or upsetting
blow away the cobwebs: see COBWEB. news. 
blow your cool lose your composure; which way the wind blows how a situation
become angry or agitated, informalis likely to develop. 
blow the doors off be considerably better
or more successful than. North American blow-by-blow
informal a blow-by-blow account a detailed narrative
of events as they happened. 
blow a fuse or gasket lose your temper. 
informal blownThe metaphor is of the failure of an
be blown away be extremely impressed. 
electrical circuit or engine as a result of informal
overheating. be blown off course have your plans
blow the gaff: see G A F F. 
disrupted by some circumstance. 
This phrase is a nautical metaphor:blow great guns: see G N. 
contrary winds turn a sailing ship away from blow hot and cold alternate inconsistently its intended course. 
between two moods, attitudes, or courses
of action; be sometimes enthusiastic, be blown out of the water of a person, idea,
sometimes unenthusiastic about some- or project be shown to lack credibility or
thing. viability. 
1997 Daily Mail Thingsfinallyseem to be
This phrase refers to a fable involving a looking up for Kelly—which is more than can
traveller who was offered hospitality by a be said for Biff, whose romantic plans are
satyr and offended his host by blowing on his blown out of the water by Linda. 
cold fingers to warm them and on his hotsoup to cool it. blue
blow the lid off: see LID. between the devil and the deep blue sea see
blow someone mind affect someone very DEVIL. 
strongly, informal a bolt from the blue: see BOLT. 
Blow someone mind was originally a
do something until you are blue in the face
mid 20th-century expression for the effect of persist in trying your hardest at an activity
hallucinatory drugs such as LSD. but without success, informal
once in a blue moon very rarely; practically
blow off steam: see STEAM. never, informalblow your own horn: see HORN. 
The colour blue was an arbitrary choice in blow your own trumpet: see TRUMPET. this phrase. To say that the moon is blue is
blow a raspberry: see RASPBERRY. : recorded in the 16th century as a way of
indicating that something could not be true, blow someone socks off: see SOCK. 31 boat
out of the blue without warning; very value was weaker than their heavy betting
unexpectedly, informal suggested. 
This phrase refers to a blue i. clear sky, from which nothing unusual is expected. blush
spare or save someone blushes refrain
scream blue murder: see MURDER. from causing someone embarrassment. 
talk a blue streak speak continuously and at
great length. North American informal
board
O A blue streak refers to something like a above board honest; not secret. 
j flash of lightning in its speed and vividness. Above board was originally a gambling
true blue genuine. term, indicating fair play by players who kept their hands above the board i. the table. 
The sense of someone being true blue
may derive from the idea of someone being across the board: see ACROSS. 
genuinely aristocratic, or having blue blood , In recent times, the term true blue hasgo by the board of something planned or
become particularly associated with loyal previously upheld be abandoned, rejected,
supporters of the British Conservative party. or ignored. 
the wide or wild blue yonder the sky or In former times, go by the board was a
nautical term meaning fall overboard and
sea; the far or unknown distance. was used of a mast falling past the board i. The phrase comes from Army Air Corps the side of the ship. 
1939, a song by Robert Crawford: Off we go into the wild blue yonder, Climbing high into on board as a member of a team or group. 
the sun. informal
On board literally means on or in a ship,
blue-eyed aircraft, or other vehicle, or of a jockey riding a horse. 
a blue-eyed boy the favourite of someone in
authority. take something on board fully consider
The significance of blue eyes may be their or assimilate a new idea or situation. 
association with the innocence and charm of informal
a very young child. The term is first recordedtread or walk the boards appear on stage as
in a novel by P. G. Wodehouse in 1924. 
an actor, informal1998 Spectator Of the three, the arrest of
Osborne, one of the blue-eyed boys of Britishracing, was the most striking. boat
be in the same boat be in the same
blue-sky unfortunate or difficult circumstances as
blue-sky research research that is not others, informal
directed towards any immediate or definite burn your boats: see BURN. 
commercial goal. 
1997 New Scientist Bell Labs and IBM are well off the boat recently arrived from a foreign
known for blue-sky research. They have country, and by implication naive or an
people who are paid just to sit around and outsider, informal, often offensive
think—not about products. push the boat out be lavish in your spending
or celebrations. British informal
bluff Pusn the boat out apparently originated call someone bluff challenge someone to ! as mid 20th-century naval slang meaning pay carry out a stated intention, in the for a round of drinks. 
expectation of being able to expose it as a
false pretence. rock the boat say or do something to disturb
an existing situation and upset other
In the game of poker which was formerly people, informal
also known by the name of bluff, calling 1999 Times The six candidates are so
someone bufY meant making an opponent determined not to rock the boat that they are
show their hand in order to reveal that its
in danger of saying nothing of interest. bob 32bob bold
bob and weave make rapid bodily as bold as brass confident to the point of
movements up and down and from side impudence. to side. 
Brass is used in this phrase as a
Bob your uncle everything isfine;problem metaphorical representation of a lack of
solved. British informal : shame, as it was in the old expression a brass 
face, meaning an impudent person. 
Bob isa familiar form of the name Robert. 
The origin of the phrase is often said to be in !
the controversial appointment in 1887 of bolt
the young Arthur Balfour to the important a bolt from the blue a sudden and
post of Chief Secretary for Ireland by hisunexpected event or piece of news. 
uncle Lord Salisbury, whose first name was
Robert. The problem with this explanation is The phrase refers to the unlikelihood of a that the phrase is not recorded until the thunderbolt coming out of a clear blue sky. 
1930s. have shot your bolt have done all that is in
1996 Colin Bateman Of Wee Sweetie Mice and your power, informal
Men couldn believe how easy it was to get. 
ust walked into a shop, signed a piece of lnthisidiom,thebotreferredtoisathick, paper, and Bob your uncle. heavy arrow for a crossbow. 
bodkin 1998 Spectator The Britpop boom has ended,
the Spice Girls have shot their bolt. 
ride bodkin travel squeezed between two
other people, dated make a bolt for try to escape by moving
suddenly towards something. body A Dot here is a sudden spring or start into body and soul involving every aspect of a rapid motion, typically that made by a horse breaking into an uncontrollable gallop. person; completely. 
keep body and soul together manage tostay alive, especially in difficultbomb
go down a bomb be very well received. British
circumstances. informalknow where the bodies are buried haveThis phrase is especially used of
the security deriving from personal entertainment and in this context is the
knowledge of an organization opposite of go down like a lead balloon see confidential affairs and secrets. : LEAD. 
informal
go like a bomb be very successful, of a
over my dead body: see DEAD. vehicle or person move very fast. Britishboil informal
go off the boil pass the stage at which
interest, excitement, activity, etc. is at its Bondi
greatest. give someone Bondi attack someone
it all boils down to it amounts to or is in savagely. Australian informal
essence. A bondi also spelled boondie, bundi, or Boiling down a liquid means reducing bundy is a heavy Aboriginal club. 
its volume and concentrating it by
evaporation. bone
1998 Times And why are deals getting more a bag of bones: see BAG. 
complex? Unsurprisingly it all boils down to the bare bones: see BARE. 
profit. a bone of contention a subject or issue over
make your blood boil: see BLOOD. which there is continuing disagreement. 
boiling The idea is of a bone thrown into the
midst of a number of dogs and causing a fight keep the pot boiling maintain the momen between them. 
tum or interest value of something. 33 boot
a bone in your leg or head a feigned 1948 P. G. Wodehouse Uncle Dynamite She
looks on you as a... poor, spineless sheep who
reason for idleness, informal can say boo to a goose. 
close to or near the bone of a remarkpenetrating and accurate to the point of booay
causing hurt or discomfort. of a joke or
up the booay completely wrong or astray. 
story likely to cause offence because nearAustralian & New Zealandthe limit of decency. 
Literally, the booay are remote rural
cut or pare something to the bone
districts. The origin of the term is uncertain,
reduce something to the bare minimum. though Puhoi, the name of a district in North have a bone to pick with someone have Auckland, New Zealand, has been suggested as the source. 
reason to disagree or be annoyed with
someone, informal
A bone to pick or gnaw has been a bookmetaphor for a problem or difficulty to be
thought over since the mid 16th century. be in someone black books: see BLACK. 
bring someone to book bring someone toin your bones felt, understood, or believed
ustice; punish someone. very deeply or instinctively. 
by the book strictly according to the rules. 
make no bones about something have no
hesitation in stating or dealing with close the books make no further entries at
something, however unpleasant, the end of an accounting period; cease
awkward, or distasteful it is. trading. 
a closed book: see CLOSED. 
This expression, which dates back to the
16th century, may originally have referred to cook the books: see COOK. 
eating a bowl of soup in which no bones in bad or good books n
were found and which was therefore easily disfavour or favour with someone. 
eaten. make or open a book take bets and pay outwinnings on the outcome of a race or other
not a — bone in your body not the slightest
contest or event. trace of the specified quality. 
1999 Scott Turow Personal Injuries mean, like on the books contained in a list of members,
Betty. Not a mean bone in her body. employees, or clients. 
point the bone at betray someone; cause read like a book: see A D. 
someone downfall. Australian suit someone book be convenient or
acceptable to someone. British
The phrase comes from an Australian
Aboriginal ritual, in which a bone is pointed take a leaf out of someone book: see
at a victim so as to curse them and cause their LEAF. 
sickness or death. throw the book at charge or punish
someone as severely as possible or
to the bone 0of a wound so deep as to
permitted, informalexpose the victim bone, affecting aperson in a very penetrating way. 
to your bones or to the bone in a verybootboots and all completely. Australian & New
fundamental way used to emphasize that a
Zealand informal
person possesses a specified quality as an
1947 D. M. Davin The Rest of Our Lives The
essential or innate aspect of their
next thing he is counter-attack, bootspersonality. and all. 
2003 Eve Gloria is known today to be a
conservative to her bones—a true monarchist. the boot is on the other foot the situation
has reversed. work your fingers to the bone work very
hard. A North American variant is the shoe is on 
the other foot. boo die with boots : see 
wouldn say boo to a goose of a person get the boot be dismissed from your job or
very shy or reticent. position, informal
bootstrap 34
Get the boot comes from the idea of booty
being literally kicked out, as does give
someone the boot. A facetious expansionshake your booty dance energetically. informal
of this idiom is get the Order of the Boot. 
hang up your boots: see A G. borak
put the boot in treat someone brutally, poke borak at make fiin of someone. Australian
especially when they are vulnerable. British & New Zealand, dated
informal Borak was used in 19th-centuryAustralian to mean nonsense or rubbish. It
The literal sense is kick someone hard
was originally a pidgin term and was based
when they are already on the ground. 
on an Aboriginal word meaning no, not. 
seven-league boots the ability to travel very 1960 Eric North Nobody Stops Me I... sub fast on foot. scribed to his ravings about women, while
everybody else about the place poked borak
This phrase comes from the fairy story of at him. Hop my Thumb, in which magic boots
enable the wearer to travel seven leagues at jeach stride. born
be born with a silver spoon in your mouth:
to boot as well; in addition, informal see SILVER. 
born and bred by birth and upbringing. 
Boot here has nothing to do with 1991 Sharon Kay Penman The Reckoning was
footwear but comes from an Old Englishbeing tended by a most unlikely nurse, an Irish
word meaning good, profit, or advantage. It survives for the most part only in this phrase sprite who spoke French as if she was Paris
and in bootless meaning unavailing or born and bred. 
profitless. born in the purple: see PURPLE. 
1998 New Scientist It an ideal first-year not know you are born be unaware how
programming book, covering both Java and easy your life is. informal
programming concepts clearly, with humour there one or a sucker born every
to boot. minute there are many stupid or gullible
tough as old boots: see G people about used as a comment on a
you can bet your boots: see B T. particular situation in which someone
your heart sinks into your boots used to has been or is about to be deceived. 
express a feeling of sudden sadness or informaldismay. to the manner born: see A N R. 
wasn born yesterday used to indicate
This idiom has given rise to the adjective heartsink, used in the medical profession to that you are not foolish or gullible. 
describe a patient who causes their medicalpractitioner to experience such a feeling, borrow
usually as a result of making frequent visits toborrow trouble take needless action that
the surgery to complain of persistent but may have bad effects. North American
unidentifiable ailments. borrowed
bootstrap living on borrowed time continuing to
pull or drag yourself up by your own survive against expectations used with the
bootstraps improve your position by your implication that this will not be for much
own efforts. longer. 
borrowed plumes a pretentious display not
A bootstrap is sometimes sewn into the
rightly your own. 
back of boots to help with pulling them on. 
This idiom has given rise to the computing This phrase refers to the fable of the jay
term bootstrapping, meaning the process of which dressed itself in the peacock feathers, loading a program into a computer by means
of a few initial instructions which enable the
introduction of the rest of the program from boss
aninputdevice. Wenowrefertotheprocessof starting a computer as booting or booting up. show someone who boss make it clear
that it is yourself who is in charge. 
35 box
both a dead cat bounce: see DEAD. 
cut both ways: see CUT. on the bounce Oas something rebounds,
in quick succession, informalhave it both ways benefit from two
0 2001 Greyhound Star He has now won twelve
incompatible ways of thinking or behaving. 
races on the bounce, including three big
1998 New Scientist It is only now dawning on
the legislators that they cannot have it both competitions. 
ways—that cleanliness and ecological
friendliness are incompatible. bound
duty-bound: see DUTY. 
bothered honour-bound: see HONOUR. 
hot and bothered in a state of anxiety or
physica iscomfort, especially as a result
boundenof being pressured. a bounden duty a responsibility regarded by
yourself or others as obligatory. 
bottle Bounden as the past participle of bind is have or show a lot of bottle have or show now archaic in all contexts and is seldom
boldness or initiative. British informal found except in this phrase. 
The mid 19th-century slang phrase no
bottle, meaning no good or useless , is the bow
probable origin of bottle current sense of bow and scrape behave in an obsequious
courage or nerve. Nowadays we also find way to someone in authority. 
the expressions lose your bottle meaning
lose your nerve and bottle out meaning failbow down in the house of Rimmon pay lip
to do something as a result of losing your service to a principle; sacrifice your
nerve. principles for the sake of conformity. 

hit or be on the bottle start to drink alcohol Rmmon was a god worshipped in ancient Damascus; the source of this phrase is
heavily, especially in an attempt to escapeNaaman request in 2 Kings 5:18, when from one problems, informal bow down myself in the house of Rimmon,
the Lord pardon thy servant in this thing. bottom
be bumping along the bottom of an have a second string to your bow: see STRING. 
economy or industry be at the lowest point make your bow make your first formal
in its performance without improving or appearance in a particular role. 
deteriorating further. take a bow Qof an actor or entertainer
bottom drawer: see DRAWER. acknowledge applause after a performance,
used to tell someone that they should
the bottom falls or drops out of something
feel themselves worthy of applause. 
something fails or collapses totally. the bottom line: see LINE. 
a warning shot across the bows a statement
or gesture intended to frighten someone
from the bottom of your heart: see HEART. 
into changing their course of action. 
scrape the bottom of the barrel: see SCRAPE. 
Literally, a shot fired in front of the bows touch bottom: see TOUCH. 
of a ship is one which is not intended to hit it you can bet your bottom dollar: see you can but to make it stop or alter course. 
bet your boots at BET. 
bought bowla bowl of cherries: see CHERRY. have bought it be killed, informalbox
bounce black box: see BLACK. 
bounce an idea off someone share an
box clever act so as to outwit someone. British
idea with another person in orderinformalto get feedback on it and refine it. informal
1950 Alexander Baron There No Home If you
bounce off the walls be full of nervous box clever and keep your mouth shut... you
excitement or agitation. North American ought to be able to count on a suspended
informal sentence. 
box seat 36
be a box of birds be fine or happy. Australian & the brass ring success, especially as a reward
New Zealand for ambition or hard work. North American
a box of tricks an ingenious gadget, informalinformal
in the wrong box placed unsuitably or This phrase refers to the reward of a free awkwardly; in difficulty or at a ride on a merry-go-round given to the person who succeeds in hooking a brass ring
disadvantage. suspended over the horses. 
This phrase perhaps arose with reference to an apothecary boxes, from which a brass neck cheek or effrontery, informal
mistaken choice might have provided poison iget down to brass tacks start to
instead of medicine. 
consider the essential facts or practical
out of the box unusually good. Australian & New details; reach the real matter in hand. 
Zealand informalinformal
1932 T. S. Eliot Sweeney Agonistes That all th
out of your box intoxicated with alcohol or facts when you come to brass tacks: Birth, and
drugs. British informal copulation, and death. 
Pandora box: see PANDORA. not a brass farthing no money or assets at all. 
think outside the box have ideas that are informal
original, creative, or innovative, informal part brass rags with: see RAG. 
box seat brave
in the box seat in an advantageous position. brave new world a new and hopeful period
Australian & New Zealand in history resulting from major changes in
society. boy
boys in blue policemen; the police, informal This phrase comes ultimately from
Shakespeare The Tempest, but is more often boys will be boys childish, irresponsible, used with allusion to Aldous Huxley ironical or mischievous behaviour is typical of use of the phrase as the title of his 1932 novel boys or young men. proverb Brave New World. 
jobs for the boys: see JOB. 
put a brave face on something: see FACE. 
the old boy network: see NETWORK. 
one of the boys accepted by a group of breachmen. step into the breach take the place of
sort out the men from the boys: see MAN. someone who is suddenly unable to do a
ob or task. brainI" military terms a breach is a gap in
have something on the brain be obsessed
fortifications made by enemy guns or
with something, informal explosives. In this context, to stand in
pick someone brains: see PICK. the breach is to bear the brunt of an attack
when other defences or expedients have
rack your brains: see RACK. failed. brass
brass monkey used in various phrases to bread
refer to extremely cold weather. the best or greatest thing since sliced
bread a notable new idea, person, or thingO Brass monkey comes from the mid 20th century vulgar slang expression cold enough jused to express real or ironic appreci to freeze the balls off a brass monkey , the ation, informal
origin of which has been debated. OneThis phrase alludes to the mid 20th suggestion relates it to brass trays known as ! century advertising promotions for packed,
monkeys on which cannon balls were once pre-sliced loaves. !
stowed aboard warships. 
bread and circuses material benefits and
1994 Camping Magazine David will be doing his
best to show you how to keep warm under entertainment employed by rulers or
canvas even if the temperature outside has political parties to keep the masses happy
dipped to brass monkey level. and docile. 37 breath
Bread and circuses is a translation of thebreak a butterfly on a wheel use
Latin phrase partem et circenses, which unnecessary force in destroying something
appeared in Juvenal Satires, and which fragile or insignificant. 
alludestothe Roman emperors organization of grain handouts and gladiatorial games for former times, breaking someone upon the populace. the wheel was a form of punishment or
torture which involved fastening criminals to
break bread with share a meal with a wheel so that their bones would be broken
or dislocated. someone, dated
cast your bread upon the waters do good 1998 Times But why break a butterfly upon a
without expecting gratitude or immediate wheel? What harm does the Liberal
Democrat leader do? Unfortunately he may
reward. be about to do a great deal. 
This expression comes from Ecclesiastes
11:1: Cast thy bread upon the waters: for
break a leg! good luck! theatrical slang
thou shalt find it after many days. break cover: see COVER. break the ice: see ICE. 
eat the bread of idleness eat food that you
have not worked for. literary break the mould: see MOULD. 
break new or fresh ground do pioneering
This phrase appears in the description of the virtuous woman in Proverbs 31:27: work. 
She... eateth not the bread of idleness. break rank: see RANK. 
break ship fail to rejoin your ship afterhave your bread buttered on both sides beabsence on leave. 
in a state of easy prosperity. 
give me a break! used to express
know on which side your bread is buttered
contemptuous disagreement or disbelief
know where your advantage lies. 
man cannot live by bread alone people have about something that has been said. 
spiritual as well as physical needs. give someone a break stop putting
This phrase comes from Matthew 4:4
pressure on someone about something. 
quoting Deuteronomy 8:3, where the informal
passage continues but by every word that make a break for make a sudden dash
proceedeth out of the mouth of God. 
in the direction of, usually in a bid to
someone bread and butter someone escape. 
livelihood; routine work to provide an make a clean break remove yourself
income. 
1998 Times It is not that the smaller deal has completely and finally from a situation or
disappeared—they remain the bread and relationship. 
butter of this industry. that or them the breaks that the way
take the bread out of people mouths things turn out used to express resigned
deprive people of their livings, especially acceptance of a situation. North American
by competition or unfair working informal
practices. breakfast
want your bread buttered on both sides a dog breakfast: see DOG. 
want more than is practicable or than is have someone for breakfast deal with or
reasonable to expect, informal
defeat someone with contemptuous ease. informalbread-and-butter breast
a bread-and-butter letter a guest written
thanks for hospitality. beat your breast make a great show of
sorrow or regret. 
break make a clean breast of something: see CLEAN. 
break the back of accomplish the main or breath
hardest part of a task, overwhelm or a breath of fresh air a small amount of or a
defeat. brief time in the fresh air. a refreshing
break the bank: see BANK. change, especially a new person on thescene. 
breathe 38
the breath of life a thing that someone needs bridgeor depends on. 
burn your bridges: see burn your boats at
Breath of life is a biblical phrase: And the BURN. 
Lord God formed man of the dust of the cross that bridge when you come to it deal
ground, and breathed into his nostrils the with a problem when and if it arises. 
breath of life Genesis 2:7. 1998 Spectator As to what would happen to the
case for non-proliferation when the Cold War
don hold your breath used to indicate that was won, the allies would cross that bridge
something is very unlikely to happen. when they came to it, which seemed at the
save your breath not bother to say time well beyond any foreseeable future. 
something because it is pointless. take someone breath away inspire brief
someone with awed respect or delight; hold no brief for not support or argue in
astonish someone. favour of. 
1988 Janet Frame The Carpathians The speed of j Thebrefreferredtoisthesummaryofthe
the process took everyone breath away. facts and legal points in a case given to a
waste your breath talk or give advice barrister to argue in court. without effect. brightbreathe
breathe down someone neck constantly bright and early very early in the morning. 
check up on someone. follow closely as bright as a button intelligently alert and
behind someone. lively, informal
breathe your last die. There is a play here on bright in its Old
English sense of shiny like a polished metal :
button and bright in its transferred sense of Ibreed quick-witted , found since the mid 18th
a breed apart a kind of person or thing that is century. 
very different from the norm. 
the bright lights the glamour and excite a dying breed: see DYING. ment of a big city. 
brick bright spark a clever person often used
a brick short of a load of a person stupid. ironically to or of a person who has done
informal something you consider stupid. British
informalThis is one of a number of humorous
variations on the theme of someone notbright young thing a wealthy, pleasure possessing their proper share of brains or loving, and fashionable young person. 
intelligence; compare, for example, withThe term was originally applied in the
a sandwich short of a picnic at SANDWICH. 
1920s to a member of a young fashionable
group of people noted for their exuberant
come down like a ton of bricks exert and outrageous behaviour. 
crushing weight, force, or authority
against someone, informal look on the bright side be optimistic or
come up against or hit a brick wall cheerful in spite of difficulties. 
encounter an insuperable problem orobstacle while trying to do something. bright-eyed
make bricks without straw try to accomplish bright-eyed and bushy-tailed alert and
something without proper or adequate lively; eager, informal
material, equipment, or information. 
bring
The allusion here is to Exodus 5:6-19 bring the bacon: see B A N. 
where without straw meant without
having straw provided , as the Israelites were bring the house down make an audience
required to gather straw for themselves in respond with great enthusiasm, especially
order to make the bricks required by their as shown by their laughter or applause. 
Egyptian taskmasters. A misinterpretation
bring something home to someone: seehas led to the current sense. HOME. 
39 buck
bring something into play cause something Big brother comes from the slogan Big
to begin to have an effect. Brother is watching you in George Orwell  
novel 7984. bring someone to book: see BOOK. British brown
the British disease a problem or failing as brown as a berry of a person very
supposed to be characteristically British, suntanned. 
especially formerly a proneness to in a brown study in a reverie; absorbed in
industrial unrest, informal
your thoughts. 
broad The earliest meaning of brown in English ;
broad in the beam fat round the hips, informal was simply dark. From this, an extended
sense of gloomy or serious developed and it A beam was one of the horizontal is apparently from this sense that we get the transverse timbers in a wooden ship, and so phrase in a brown study. 
the word came to refer to a ship breadth at its widest point. It is from this sense that the 2001 New York Review of Books When he isn t
current meaning of broad in the beam stirring up mischief, or conniving for gold, or
developed. composing beautiful poetry, he apt to besunk in a brown study. 
in broad daylight used generally to expresssurprise or outrage at someone daring brownie
to carry out a particular act, especially a brownie point an imaginary award given to
crime, during the day, when anyone someone who does good deeds or tries to
could see it. please, informal
it as broad as it long there no significant
The Brownies are the junior wing of the
difference between two possible
Guides; the organization awards points and
alternatives, informal badges for proficiency in various activities. 
brokego for broke risk everything in an all-out brunt
effort, informal bear the brunt of be the person to suffer
the most as the result of an attack,
broken misfortune, etc.. a broken reed: see REED. 
The origin of brunt is unknown, and may broo be onomatopoeic. The sense has evolved
from the specific a sharp or heavy blow to on the broo claiming unemployment the more general the shock or violence of an benefit. Scottish informal attack. 
Broo, also spelt buroo, is a colloquial
alteration of bureau, meaning a labour
exchange or social security office. bubbleburst someone bubble: see BURST. 
on the bubble of a sports player or team
broom occupying the last qualifying position
a new broom a newly appointed person who in a team or for a tournament, and liable
is likely to make far-reaching changes. to be replaced by another. North American
This phrase comes from the proverb a new informal
broom sweeps clean. This expression comes from sit on the
bubble, with the implication that the bubble may burst. brotha broth of a boy a lively boy. Irish
too many cooks spoil the broth: see COOK. buck
the buck stops here or with someone the
brother responsibility for something cannot or
Big brother the state perceived as a sinister should not be passed to someone else. 
force supervising citizens lives. informalbucket 40
Famously, the buck stops here was the bug
wording of a sign on the desk of US President ;Harry S. Truman. Compare with pass the buck have or be bitten by the bug develop a
below. sudden strong enthusiasm for something. 
buck up your ideas make more effort; b g g vulgar slang
become more energetic and hardworking. bugger all nothing. 
informal bugger me used to express surprise or
Buck here refers to the lively action of a amazement. 
horse jumping with all its feet together and play silly buggers act in a foolish way. 
its back arched. Buck up in its modern senses of cheer up and hurry up is first found in Buggins
late 19th-century school slang. Buggins turn: see N. 
make a fast buck earn easily and
builtquickly, informal
built on sand without secure foundations;
pass the buck shift the responsibility for liable to collapse. 
something to someone else, informal
This phrase comes from the
A buck is an object placed as a reminder in parable contrasting the wise man who built
front of the person whose turn it is to deal in his house on rock with the fool who built his the game of poker. on sand Matthew 7:24-7. 
1998 New York Review of Books The
legislation left the main decisions to the bulge
individual states which may well pass the
buck to the large cities where most of the have or get the bulge on have or get an
problem is. advantage over. British informalbucket bulging
bulging at the seams: see A M. 
a drop in a bucket: see P. 
kick the bucket: see K K. bull
like a bull at a gate hastily and withoutBuckley thought. 
Buckley chance a forlorn hope; no chance like a bull in a china shop behaving
at all. Australian & New Zealand informal recklessly and clumsily in a place or
j phrase is often shortened simply to
situation where you are likely to cause
Buckley  . Who or what Buckley was remains damage or injury. 
uncertain: the name is sometimes said to a red rag to a bull: see RED. 
j refer to William Buckley, a convict take or grab the bull by the horns deal
transported to Australia in 1802 who escaped bravely and decisively with a difficult,
and lived with the Aborigines for many years, dangerous, or unpleasant situation. ! despite dire predictions as to his chances of
j survival. 2000 Andrew Calcutt Brit Cult The government
has failed to take the bull by the horns, thereby
1948 Vance Palmer Golconda Buckley chance granting hunt sabs a new lease of life. 
we have of getting our price if we re left to facethe companies alone. bullet
bite the bullet: see B buffsweat bullets: see A T. 
in the buff naked, informal
The original meaning of buff in English bully
was buffalo , and it later came to mean ox bully for —! wel one! good for you, them,
hide or the colour of ox hide. In the buff etc. !
itself comes from buff leather, a type of
yellowish-beige ox hide formerly used in This expression takes its origin from
military uniform, the colour of which was the US colloquial sense of bully meaning
regarded as comparable to that of human first-rate , recorded since the mid 19th
skin. century. 41 burnbum bung
bums on seats the audience at a theatre, go bung die. fail or go bankrupt. 
cinema, or other entertainment, viewed as Australian & New Zealand informal
a source of income, informal In this sense bung comes from Yagara, an give someone or get the bum rush extinct Aboriginal language. 
forcibly eject someone or be forcibly
ejected from a place or gathering. 1951 J. Devanny Travel in North Queensland
0 abruptly dismiss someone or be The stations would go bung without the
abruptly dismissed for a poor idea or ADOS , one of the missionaries told me. 
performance, chiefly North American
01998 Spectator When... James Cameron burden
wrote an uproariously funny piece about the the white man burden the task, believed
hotel iniquities... he was promptly given by white colonizers to be incumbent upon
the bum rush. them, of imposing Western civilization on
on the bum travelling rough and with no the black inhabitants of European colonies. 
fixed home; vagrant. North American dated
The white man burden comes frombump Rudyard Kipling poem of that title 1899,
things that go bump in the night: see THING. originally referring specifically to the United !
States role in the Philippines. bumper
bumper-to-bumper very close together,
as cars in a traffic jam. chiefly of anburl
insurance policy comprehensive; all- give it a burl attempt to do something. 
inclusive. Australian & New Zealand informal1953 T. A. G. Hungerford Riverslake Well you
want to give it a burl—you want to come?bun
have a bun in the oven be pregnant, informal burn
take the bun: see TAKE. burn your boats or bridges commityourself irrevocably. 
bunch
bunch of fives a fist, a punch. British In a military campaign, burning your
informal ! boats or bridges would make escape or
retreat impossible. 
bundle burn the candle at both ends lavish
a bundle of nerves: see a bag of nerves at energy or resources in more than one
BAG. direction at the same time, go to bed late
a bundle of fun or laughs something and get up early. 
extremely amusing or pleasant, informal burn daylight: see DAYLIGHT. 
drop your bundle panic or lose one self- burn your fingers: see FINGER. 
control. Australian & New Zealand informalburn the midnight oil read or work late into
This expression comes from an obsolete the night. 
sense of bundle meaning swag or a burn rubber: see RUBBER. 
traveller or miner bundle of personal
belongings. go for the burn push your body to the
extremes when practising a form of
go a bundle on be very keen on or fond of. physical exercise, informalBritish informal
The burn referred to is the burning
n this idiom, bundle is being used in the ; sensation caused in muscles by strenuous
late 19th-century US slang sense of a bundle exertion. 
of money, i. a large sum. To go a bundle on 
was originally early 20th-century slang for have money to burn: see MONEY. 
betting a large sum of money on a horse. someone ears are burning: see EAR. 
1968 Adam Diment Bang Bang Birds don go a slow burn a state of slowly mounting anger
bundle on being told a pro. or annoyance, informalburner 42burner bush
on the back or front burner having low or beat about the bush: see BEAT. 
high priority, informal beat the bushes: see BEAT. 
The metaphor here is from cooking on a bush telegraph: see TELEGRAPH. 
stove with several burners of varying heat: go bush leave your usual surroundings; run
food cooking at a lower temperature on a
back burner receives or requires less frequent wild. 
attention than that cooking at a high Bush in the sense of wild, wooded, or
temperature on a front burner. Compare uncleared country became current among
with the mainly North American expression English speakers during 19th-century British
cook on the front burner meaning be on the colonial expansion. In South Africa it may
way to rapid success. have been adopted directly from Dutch bosch. 
burnt bushel
burnt to a cinder or crisp completely burnt hide your light under a bushel: see HIDE. 
through, leaving only the charred remnant. 
businessburr the business end the part of a tool,
a burr under or in your saddle a persistent weapon, etc. that carries out the
source of irritation. North American informal object particular function, informal
1936 Richmal Crompton Sweet William Theburst business end of a geometrical compass was
burst someone bubble shatter someone abbed into Douglas arm. 
illusions about something or destroy their do the business do what is required or
sense of well-being. expected; achieve the desired result. British
informal have sexual intercourse, vulgarbursting slang
bursting at the seams: see SEAMS. 
like nobody business in no ordinary way;
Burton to an extremely intense degree, informal1991 Elspeth Barker 0 Caledonia They spread
go for a Burton meet with disaster; be like nobody business. They re a really
ruined, destroyed, or killed. British informal pernicious weed. 
This phrase first appeared in mid 20th century air force slang, meaning be killed in busman
a crash. It has been suggested that it refers to a busman holiday a holiday or form of
Burton  , the British men outfitters, or to recreation that involves doing the
Burton, a kind of ale, but these are folk same thing that you do at work. 
etymologies with no definite evidence to
support them, and the origin of the phrase From the late 19th century, a popular
remains uncertain. form of working-class recreation was to take :
an excursion by bus. burybury the hatchet end a quarrel or conflict busted
and become friendly. a busted flush someone or something that
has not fulfilled expectations; a failure. 
This expression makes reference to an US informal
Native American custom of burying a hatchet or tomahawk to mark the conclusion of a the game of poker, a busted flush is a
peace treaty. sequence of cards of one suit that you fail to ! complete. 
bury your head in the sand ignore
unpleasant realities; refuse to face facts. 
busy
This expression alludes to the belief as busy as a bee very busy or industrious. 
that ostriches bury their heads in the sand
when pursued, thinking that as they cannot butcher
see their pursuers the pursuers cannot seethe butcher, the baker, the candlestick-them. 
maker people of all kinds. 43 bygones
0 This phrase comes from the traditional button
nursery rhyme Rub-dub-dub, Three men in a 
tub. button your lip remain silent, informal
on the button punctually. exactly right. 
have a butcher have a look. British informal informal, chiefly US
O Butcher comes here from butcher press the button initiate an action or train of
hook, rhyming slang for look. events, informal
During the cold war period, thisexpression was often used with reference to :
butter the possible action of the US or Soviet
look as if butter wouldn melt in your presidents in starting a nuclear war. 
mouth appear deceptively gentle or
innocent, informal push or press someone buttons be
successful in arousing or provoking a
butterfingers reaction in someone, informal
have or be a butterfingers be unable tocatch deftly or hold securely. buy
buy the farm die. North American informal
This phrase comes from the idea that
hands covered with butter will be slippery, This expression originated as US military
making holding on to anything difficult, slang, probably with the meaning that the
There was also a dialect sense of unable pilot or owner of a crashed plane owes
to handle anything hot , as if your fingers money to the farmer whose property or land were made of melting butter. is damaged in the crash. 
Butterfingers! is often jeeringly shouted at
someone who has failed to catch a ball in a buy time adopt tactics which delay an event
game. temporarily so as to have longer to improveyour own position. 
butterfly by
the butterfly effect the phenomenon
whereby a minute localized change in a by and large on the whole; everything
complex system can have large effects considered. 
elsewhere. Originally this phrase was used in a
nautical context, describing the handling of a The expression comes from chaos theory,
ship both to the wind and off it. 
In 1979, Edward N. Lorenz gave a paperto the
American Association for the Advancementby the by or bye incidentally;
of Science entitled Does the flap of a
butterfly wings in Brazil set off a tornado in
parenthetically. Texas? bygones
have butterflies in your stomach have a let bygones be bygones forgive and forget
queasy feeling because you are nervous. past offences or causes of conflict. informalCe
the French word cahute meaning a hut or
from cohort. the big cancer, informal1998 Spectator Labour knows that. So do the
caboodle Tories and that why the two of them are in
the whole caboodle or the whole kit and cahoots. 
caboodle the whole lot. informalCain
Caboodle may come from the Dutch word mark of Cain: see MARK. 
boedel meaning possessions. raise Cain create trouble or a commotion. informal
cackleThe sense of rase in this expression is that
cut the cackle stop talking aimlessly and
of summoning a spirit, especially an evil one; ;
come to the point, informalsimilar sayings include raise the Devil and
raise hell. A mid 19th-century expression
cadenza originating in the USA, the particular form
have a cadenza be extremely agitated. South raise Cain is possibly a euphemism to avoid
African informal using the words Devil or hell. Cain, according
to the biblical book of Genesis, was the first
Cadenza is an Italian term for a virtuoso murderer. 
solo passage near the end of a piece of music, This informal sense probably comes from
Danny Kaye humorous 1940s recording The cake
Little Fiddle. cakes and ale merrymaking. 
1601 William Shakespeare Twelfth Night Dost
1991 D. Capel Personality The Conservative
thou think because thou art virtuous there
party is having a cadenza about subliminal
shall be no more cakes and ale?
messages on the SABC news logo. 
you can have your cake and eat it you can t
Caesar enjoy both of two desirable but mutually
appeal to Caesar: see APPEAL. exclusive alternatives, proverb
Caesar wife a person who is required to be the icing on the cake: see ICING. 
above suspicion. a piece of cake something easily achieved. 
This expression comes ultimately from informal
Plutarch account of Julius Caesar decision
sell or go like hot cakes be sold quickly and
to divorce his wife Pompeia. The libertine
Publius Clodius, who was in love with in large quantities. 
Pompeia, smuggled himself into the house in a slice of the cake: see SLICE. 
which the women of Caesar household
were celebrating a festival, thereby causing a take the cake: see TAKE. 
scandal. Caesar refused to bring charges ost of these idioms cake is used as a
against Clodius, but divorced Pompeia; when metaphor for something pleasant or
questioned he replied thought my wife desirable. ought not even to be under suspicion. calf
cahoots a golden calf: see GOLDEN. 
in cahoots working or conspiring together, kill the fatted calf: see FATTED. 
often dishonestly; in collusion, informalcall
In cahoots is recorded in the early 19th
call someone bluff: see BLUFF. 
century, in the south and west of the USA, in
the sense of partnership. The origin of call it a day: see DAY. 
cahoot is uncertain; it may come either from call someone names: see NAME. 
45 capitalcall of nature: see NATURE. The idea behind this idiom is that
call the shots or tune take the initiative in expenditureonacandletoprovidelightforan
activity would not be recouped by the profits !
deciding how something should be done;
from that activity. The expression comes from be in control, informal the French phrase le jeu ne vaut pas la
Call the shots was originally an American chandelle, the game is not worth the candle. phrase, first recorded in the 1960s. Call the
1998 New Scientist But what if, instead of one
tune comes from the saying he who pays the 
... five, fifteen or fifty people... have to
piper calls the tune, which dates from the late endure such an existence? At what point does19th century. the game cease to be worth the candle?
1996 Sunday Telegraph Britain is no longer run
from Downing Street. It Brussels that calls cannon
the shots. a loose cannon: see LOOSE. don call us, we ll call you used as a
dismissive way of saying that someone has canoe
not been successful in an audition or job paddle your own canoe: see PADDLE. 
application, informalcanter
good call or bad call used to express at a canter without much effort; easily. British
approval or criticism of a person  
decision or suggestion, informal At a canter is a horse-racing metaphor: a horse has to make so little effort that it can
Originallyçjooccaor3ao careferredto win at the easy pace of a canter rather than
decisions made by referees or umpires in a ! having to gallop. 
sports match. 
call a spade a spade: see SPADE. canvas
too close to call: see CLOSE. by a canvas by a small margin. 
The tapered front end of a racing boat
can was formerly covered with canvas to prevent !
water being taken on board. In this context, carry the can: see CARRY. to win by a canvas meant to win by the length in the can completed and available for use. between the tip of the bow and the first
oarsman. 
In recording or film-making, something
that is in the can has been captured on tape
or film. cap
open up a can of worms discover or bring to cap in hand humbly asking for a favour. 
light a complicated matter likely to prove To have your cap in your hand, and
awkward or embarrassing, informal therefore to have your head uncovered, is a
1998 New Scientist UN officials readily accept mark of respect and also of subordination,
that they have opened a can of worms, and The idea of a cap as a begging bowl into
their guidelines will only have an effect, they which coins can be dropped may also be
say, if governments act on them. present. A North American version of this
expression is hat in hand. 
candle if the cap fits, wear it used as a way of
burn the candle at both ends: see BURN. suggesting that someone should accept a
cannot hold a candle to be nowhere near as generalized remark or criticism as
good as. informal applying to themselves. 

n the 16th century, an assistant would Early examples of this saying show that
literally hold a candle to his superior by the cap in question was originally a fool cap. 
standing beside him with a candle to provide The variant if the shoe fits, wear it is also
enough light for him to work by. The modern found, mainly in North America. 
version suggests that the subordinate is so far inferior that he is unfit to perform even this set your cap at try to attract as a suitor, dated
humble task. capital
not worth the candle not justifiable because with a capital — used to give emphasis to the
of the trouble or cost involved. word or concept in question. 
card 46
1991 Nesta Wyn Ellis John Major He is not a
personality with a capital P, not flamboyant,carpet
not it seems an angry man. a magic carpet a means of sudden andeffortless travel. 
card In fairy tales, a mag carpet is able to
get your cards be dismissed from your transport a person sitting on it to any place
employment. British informal they desire. 
Cards are the national insurance card and on the carpet of a topic or problem under
other documents relating to an employee discussion, of a person being severely
that are retained by the employer during the reprimanded by someone in authority. 
period that the employee works for them. informal
Give someone their cards means make
someone redundant. Carpet in both these senses originally
meant table covering , and referred to the
have a card up your sleeve have a plan or carpet of the council table , a table around
asset that is kept secret until it is needed. which a problem was debated as in sense 1 British or before which a person would be
summoned for reprimand as in sense 2. The hold all the cards be in the strongest or most informal use of carpet as a verb meaning
advantageous position. reprove dates from mid 19th century. 
keep your cards close to your chest or vest
be extremely secretive and cautious about sweep something under the carpet
something, informal hide or ignore a problem or difficulty in
the hope that it will be forgotten. 
The previous two idioms both refer to a 1996 lain Pears Death & Restoration Many others
hand of cards in a card game. If you hold all would merely have swept all our problems
the cards you have a winning hand, while under the carpet, and left them until they
card players who hold their cards close to became too difficult to solve. 
their bodies ensure that no opponent canlook at them. carrot
mark someone card: see MARK. carrot and stick the promise of reward
on the cards possible or likely. combined with the threat of force or
punishment. 
This phrase, a North American variant of which is in the cards, probably refers to the The image in this expression is of offering !
practice of using playing cards or tarot cards a carrot to a donkey to encourage it to move to foretell the future. and using a stick to beat it if it refuses to
budge. play the — card exploit the specified issue or
1998 New Scientist And if your powers of
idea mentioned, especially for political persuasion prove insufficient, here a carrot
advantage. and stick policy. 
This expression comes from the view
expressed in 1886 by Lord Randolph Churchill carry
that, concerning Irish Home Rule, the carry the can take responsibility for a
Orange card would be the one to play. mistake or misdeed. British informal
1998 Edinburgh Student The SNP, who The origin of this expression and the
dominate the Scottish independence nature of the can involved are both
campaign, argue that they do not play the uncertain, though the idiom appears to
race card. have started life as early 20th-century naval
play your cards right make the best use of or military slang. 
your assets and opportunities. 
1998 Times Was this the same Mr Cook who
put or lay your cards on the table danced on the Tories graves for not carrying
be completely open and honest in the can for errors of their officials?
declaring your resources, intentions, carry the day: see DAY. 
or attitude. cart
care in the cart in trouble or difficulty. British
not care two straws care little or not at all. informal
47 catO A cart was formerly used to take convicted The concept was known to St Augustine
criminals to the public gallows and to expose 354-430, who uses the phrase subtracto
prostitutes and other offenders to public fundamento in aere aedificare meaning
humiliation in the streets. build on air without foundation. Castles in
the air has been the version predominant in
put the cart before the horse reverse the English since the late 16th century, but castles
proper order or procedure of something. in Spain, from Old French châteaux en
Espagne, was used in the late medieval
A medieval version of this expression was : period and occasionally in more recent times,
set the oxen before the yoke. The version The form of the saying in Old French, known
with horse and cart dates from the early 16th from the 13th century, may refer to the fact
century. : that much of Spain in the Middle Ages was
under Moorish control, so any scheme to
1998 Spectator It putting the cart before the build castles there was clearly unlikely to
horse. All history shows that if you want to succeed. 
create a political union, you do that first and
the single currency follows. cat
carved all cats are grey in the dark the qualities that
be carved in stone: see STONE. distinguish people from one another are
obscured in some circumstances, and if
case they can be perceived they don matter. 
proverbbe on or get off someone case start or
stop criticizing or hounding someone. The US version of this proverb is at night 
informal all cats are gray. 
bell the cat: see BELL. cash
cash in your chips die. informal the cat has got someone tongue someone
is remaining silent. 
The counters used in various gambling a cat may look at a king even a person of low
games are called chips. They are converted status or importance has rights, proverb
into cash at the conclusion of the game. 
1998 Times A cat may look at a king. The cat
cash in hand payment for goods and services may be wrong in its conclusions, but others,
by money in the form of notes and coins. following its gaze, can draw their own. 
a dead cat bounce: see DEAD. 
Cash in hand is mainly used to distinguish enough to make a cat laugh extremely
between cash payment and payment by
cheque, especially with reference to being ridiculous or ironic, informal
paid in this way in order to avoid having to
This expression dates from the mid 19th
declare the amount earned to the tax
century and is associated with the story of
authorities. Puss in Boots. cast fight like cat and dog of two people be
be cast in a — mould be of the type specified. continually arguing with one another. 
1991 Jean Bow Jane Journey He was certainly 1995 Edward Toman Dancing in Limbo Her
not cast in a common mould. She had never desertion of him hadn come as a total
surprise... for the pair of them had beenmet anyone like him before. 
fighting like cat and dog for the best part of a
cast someone adrift: see ADRIFT. year. 
cast your bread upon the waters: see BREAD. let the cat out of the bag reveal a secret,
cast the first stone: see STONE. especially carelessly or by mistake. 
cast something in someone teeth reject A similar metaphorical use of bag may be defiantly or refer reproachfully to a found in the French phrase vider le sac,
person previous action or statement. ! literally empty the bag , meaning tell the
whole story. 
castle 1996 Bernard Connolly The Rotten Heart of
build castles in the air or in Spain have a Europe Tim Renton... at odds with his leader
visionary and unattainable scheme; on Europe, let the cat out of the bag when he
daydream. told a television audience, we need a strongcatbird 48
Europe to maintain our independence from that cat won jump that suggestion is
the United States and the Pacific Rim. implausible or impracticable, informal
like a cat on a hot tin roof or on hot bricks 1965 Simon Troy No More a-Roving If you re
very agitated, restless, or anxious. telling me she fell in, just like that—oh no!
like the cat that got or who stolen the That cat won jump. 
cream self-satisfied; having achieved your turn cat in pan change sides; be a traitor. 
objective, informal, chiefly British
OTheoriginofthisphraseisunknown. lt
like a scalded cat: see SCALDED. was used in the 16th century in the form turn like something the cat brought in of a the cat in the pan with the sense of reverse
the proper order or nature of things , butthis person very dirty, bedraggled, or was replaced by the modern sense in the early exhausted, informal 17th century. 
1996 Frank McCourt Angela Ashes One of
them says we look like something the cat when the cat away, the mice will play
brought in and Malachy has to be held back people will naturally take advantage of the
fromfightingthem. absence of someone in authority to do as
no room to swing a cat: see ROOM. they like, proverb
not a cat in hell chance no chance at all. 
informal catbirdin the catbird seat in a superior or more
This expression is often shortened to nota advantageous position. North American informalcat chance. 
This expression is said to have originally
2001 James Hamilton-Paterson Loving Monsters referred to a baseball player in the fortunate There isn t, of course, a cat in hell chance position of having no strikes and therefore that shall ever see 1999 as you, and Dr Faruli three balls still to play a reference made in
know perfectly well. ames Thurber short story The Catbird Seat. 
play cat and mouse with manoeuvre in away designed alternately to provoke and
thwart an opponent. catch-22a catch-22 situation a dilemma or difficulty
The image here is of the way that a cat from which there is no escape because of
toys with a mouse, pretending to release itmutually conflicting or dependent
and then pouncing on it again. 
conditions. 
put the cat a g the pigeons say or do The classic statement of this situation is in something that is likely to cause trouble or oseph Heller novel Catch-22 1961, from
controversy. British which the expression is taken: Orr would be
crazy to fly more missions and sane if he
This expression was first recorded in J. : didn t. butif hewassanehehadtoflythem. If
Stevens Wew Spanish and English Dictionary ; he flew them he was crazy and didn have to; 
1706, where it is explained as referring to a but if he didn want to he was sane and had
man coming into the company of a group of to. 
women. The idiom flutter the dovecotes
see FLUTTER is based on the same idea of a 1997 New Scientist It a catch-22 situation:
group of pigeons as a tranquil or harmless you cannot get the job without having the
community. relevant experience and you cannot get the
experience without havingfirstdone the job. 
1998 New Scientist The... study has firmly put
the cat among the pigeons by claiming that catch
most of the therapeutic effects of expensive
antidepressant pills... can be mimicked by catch at straws: see STRAW. 
dummy pills. catch a cold: see COLD. 
see which way the cat jumps see what catch your death: see DEATH. 
direction events are taking before catch the sun be in a sunny position,
committing yourself. become tanned or sunburnt. British
1990 Dennis Kavanagh Thatcherism She
borrowed Kipling words: don spend catch a Tartar encounter or get hold of a
a lifetime watching which way the cat person who can neither be controlled nor
umps. know really which way want the got rid of; meet with a person who is
cat to go. unexpectedly more than your match. 
49 champ
The Tartars or Tatars, a combined force !
of central Asian people including Mongolscess
and Turks, established a vast empire during bad cess to a curse on. chiefly Irish
the Middle Ages under the leadership of the The origin of cess in this expression is
warlord Genghis Khan, and were a byword probably linked to the historical requirement for ferocity. for Irish households to provide the soldiers of their English overlords with provisions at the low prices assessed by the government. catch-up
play catch-up try to equal a competitor in asporting event. chafe
chafe at the bit: see a at b at
cat whiskers CHAMP. 
the cat whiskers an excellent person or
thing, informal chaffbe caught with chaff be easily deceived. 
Other similar phrases include the cat  
pyjamas and the chiefly North American the Chaff is the husks of corn separated from !
cat miaou. the grain by threshing. Be caught with chaff 
has been used since the late 15th century as
metaphor for being easily fooled or trapped, jcause
make common cause with unite with in separate the a from the chaff: see
order to achieve a shared aim. WHEAT. 
1997 A. Sivanandan When Memory Dies was
sorry that the crows, proud kings of the dung- chain
heap, should make common cause with pull or yank someone chain tease
house-sparrows under the eaves of roofs. someone, especially by leading them to
a rebel without a cause: see B L. believe something that isn true. US informal
caution chalice
throw caution to the wind or winds act a a poisoned chalice: see D. 
completely reckless manner. chalk
cave as different as chalk and cheese funda keep cave act as lookout, school slang
mentally different or incompatible. British
Cave is a Latin word meaning beware! 
The opposition of chalk and cheese
Pronounced as one or two syllables, cavehinges on their being totally different in all
was the traditional warning uttered by a
qualities other than their rather similarschoolchild to let others know that a teacher appearance. 
was approaching. by a long chalk b far. British
caviar This expression is based on the old custom caviar to the general a good thing that is not of marking up points scored in a game with
appreciated by the ignorant. chalk on a blackboard, as is its opposite not
by a long chalk meaning by no means; not
This phrase comes from Shakespeare at all. 
Hamlet, where Hamlet commends a play with the words: the play, remember, pleased notchalk and talk teaching by traditional
the million; twas caviar to the general. methods focusing on the blackboard and
presentation by the teacher as opposed to
Cerberus more informal or interactive methods. 
a sop to Cerberus: see P. British
walk the chalk: see A K. 
ceremonystand on ceremony insist on the observance champ
of formalities; behave formally. champ or chafe at the bit be restlessly
without ceremony without preamble or impatient, especially to start doing
politeness. something. chance 50
Champ at the bit is used literally of a This expression was apparently coined by spirited horse that tugs at the bit in its mouth Lord Chesterfield in a letter to Solomon
in its eagerness to move. Dayrolles in 1753: The chapter of knowledge is a very short, but the chapter of accidents is a jvery long one. chance
chance your arm or luck undertake
something although it may be dangerous charge
or unsuccessful; take a risk. British informal return to the charge make a further attempt
chance would be a fine thing used to express at something, especially in arguing a point. 
dateda belief that something desirable that has
just been mentioned is unlikely to happen. Charge here is used in the sense of a
headlong rush forward, usually associated
informal with attacking soldiers in a battle. 
in the last chance saloon: see LAST. 
not a cat in hell chance: see CAT. 
not a chance in hell: see HELL. charitycharity begins at home a person first
not a Chinaman chance: see CHINAMAN. responsibility is for the needs of their own
on the off chance just in case. family and friends, proverb
1992 Neal Stephenson Snow Crash They upload cold as charity: see COLD. 
staggering quantities of useless information to
the database, on the off chance that some of it
will eventually be useful. charm
work like a charm be completely successfula sporting chance: see SPORTING. or effective.
Charm here means a magic spell or lucky jchange talisman. 
change horses in midstream: see HORSE. 
a change is as good as a rest a change of chase
work or occupation can be as restorative or chase the dragon take heroin sometimes
refreshing as a period of relaxation, proverb mixed with another smokable drug by
a change of heart a move to a different heating it in tinfoil and inhaling the
opinion or attitude. fumes through a tube or roll of paper. 
change your tune express a very different Chase the dragon is reputedly a
translation from Chinese. The expressionopinion or behave in a very different way,
apparently refers to the undulating
usually in response to a change in movements of the fumes up and down the
circumstances. tinfoil, resembling those of the tail of a
dragon, a creature found in many Chinese
get no change out of fail to get information myths. 
or a desired reaction from. British informal
ring the changes vary the ways of go and chase yourself! go away! informal
expressing, arranging, or doing something. chattering
In bell-ringing, the changes are the
different sequences in which a peal of bells the chattering classes articulate and
may be rung. educated people considered as a socialgroup given to the expression of liberal
chapter opinions about society and culture. chapter and verse an exact reference or derogatory
authority. 
Chapter and verse was originally used to cheap
refer to the numbering of passages in the cheap and cheerful simple and inexpensive. 
Bible. It is now also used more generally to British
refer to any usually written authority for
something. cheap and nasty of low cost and bad quality. 
Britisha chapter of accidents a series of unfor- cheap at the price well worth having,
tunate events. regardless of the cost. 
51 chestnut
A frequently heard variant of this hard cheese used to express sympathy over a
expression, cheap at half the price, while used petty matter. British informal
to mean exactly the same, is, logically
say cheese said by a photographer to
speaking, nonsense, since cheap at twice the price is the actual meaning intended. 
encourage the subject to smile. chequered flag
check take the chequered flag finish first in a race. 
check someone or something skeef give
In motor racing a chequered flag is used
someone or something a dirty look; look to signify that the winner has passed the
askance at someone or something. South finishing post. 
Africancheck you goodbye. South African informalcherry
cheek a bite at the cherry an attempt or chance todo something. 
cheek by jowl close together; side by side. This phrase is often used in the negative,
Jowl here is used in the sense cheek ; the to express the idea that you will not get a
phrase was originally cheek by cheek. second chance a second bite at the cherry. If you take two attempts to do something,
turn the other cheek refrain from : especially some quite small task, this is taking retaliating when you have been attacked two bites at the same cherry or another bite or insulted. at the cherry. 
This expression comes from Matthew a bowl of cherries a very pleasant or
5:39: But say unto you, That ye resist enjoyable situation or experience. 
not evil: but whosoever shall smite thee
on thy right cheek, turn to him the other the cherry on the cake a desirable feature
also. perceived as the finishing touch to
something that is already inviting orworth having. cheer
pop someone cherry have sexual
of good cheer cheerful or optimistic, archaic
intercourse with a girl or woman who is a
The exhortation to be of good cheer virgin, informal
occurs in several passages of the New
Testament in the Authorized Version of the
Bible for example in Matthew 9:2, JohnCheshire
16:33, and Acts 27:22. In Middle English, grin like a Cheshire cat have a broad fixed
cheer had the meaning face. This sense of smile on your face. 
cheer is now obsolete, but the related senses
of countenance and demeanour as The Cheshire cat with its broad grin is
reflected in the countenance survive in a best known for its appearance and
number of phrases, including in good disappearance in Lewis Carroll Alice  
Adventures in Wonderland 1865, but the
cheer and the archaic what cheer! how are
expression, which is of uncertain origin, isyou?. 
recorded from the first half of the 19th
century. 
three cheers for — three successive hurrahsexpressing appreciation or congratulation
of someone or something. chest
Qualified approval or mild enthusiasm is hope chest: see HOPE. 
sometimes expressed by two cheers for—, as get something off your chest say some in the title of M. Forster book Two Cheers thing that you have wanted to say for a
for Democracy 1951. long time, resulting in a feeling of relief. 
1998 Zest So three cheers for The Body Shop informal
Community Trade programme, which is
helping organic bergamot farms thrive once chestnut
more. an old chestnut a joke, story, or subject
that has become tedious and boring
cheese as a result of its age and constant
a big cheese: see BIG. repetition. chew 52
The most likely source for this sense of and not thinking clearly about what should
chestnut is in the following exchange be done. 
between two characters, Zavior and Pablo,
in William Dimond play Broken Sword A decapitated chicken may continue to
1816: ZAVIOR... When suddenly from the flap about fora few moments before finally thick boughs of a corktree— expiring. 
PABLO. Jumping up A chesnut, Captain, a
chesnut... Captain, this isthetwenty-seventh time have heard you relate this chief
story, and you invariably said, a chesnut, until big white chief a person in authority, humorous
now. This expression supposedly represents
pull someone chestnuts out of the fire Native American speech, and also occurs as
great white chief. 
succeed in a hazardous undertaking for
someone else benefit. 1971 Roger Busby Deadlock You think he was
the bloody big white chief instead of an OB
This expression refers to the fable of atechnician. monkey using a cat paw or in some versions :
a dog paw to rake out roasting chestnuts chief cook and bottle-washer a person who
from a fire. Car paw is sometimes used as a performs a variety of important but
term for someone who is used by another routine tasks, informal
person as a tool or stooge. 
too many chiefs and not enough Indians
used to describe a situation where there are
chew too many people giving orders and not
chew the cud: see CUD. enough people to carry them out. 
chew the fat or rag chat in a leisurely way,
usually at length, informal child
1986 Tom Clancy Red Storm Rising Four-star child play a task which is very easily
admirals didn chew the fat with newly accomplished. 
frocked commanders unless they had nothing
better to do. chin
chew the scenery of an actor overact. keep your chin up remain cheerful in
informa ifficult circumstances, informaltake it on the chin endure or accept
chick misfortune courageously. 
neither chick nor child no children at all. The image here is of a boxing blow taken North American or dialect squarely on the chin. 
chicken 1998 Times The occasional bad un i. decision is inevitable, and when it comes
a chicken-and-egg problem an unresolved ... the players must take it on the chin. 
question as to which of two things causedthe other. Chinaman
This expression comes from the not a Chinaman chance not even a very
traditional riddle: which came first, the slight chance. 
chicken or the egg? 1952 Frank Yerby A Woman Called Fancy You
haven a Chinaman chance of raising that
chickens come home to roost your past money in Boston. 
mistakes or wrongdoings will eventually
be the cause of present troubles. chink
a chink in someone armour a weak point in
j This phrase comes from the proverb
curses, like chickens, come home to roost. 
someone character, arguments, or ideas
which makes them vulnerable to attack or
1997 Arundhati Roy The God of Small Things He criticism. 
knew, had known, that one day History  
twisted chickens would come home to roost. chip
count your chickens: see COUNT. a chip off the old block someone who
running or rushing about like a headless resembles their parent, especially in
chicken acting in a panic-stricken manner character, informal
53 cigar
Acip in this expression means something chop logic argue in a tiresomely pedantic
which forms a portion of, or is derived from, a way; quibble. 
larger or more important thing, and which
retains the characteristic qualities of that Chop is here used in the 16th-century
superior thing. In 1781 Edmund Burke sense meaning bandy words. This sense is
commented on Pitt the Younger maiden now obsolete, and the sense of chop used in !
speech in Parliament by saying he was: Not this phrase was later wrongly understood as !
merely a chip of the old "block", but the old cut something into small pieces. 
block itself. not much chop no good; not up to 
a chip on your shoulder a strong and usually Australian & New Zealand informal
long-standing inclination to feel resentful
The sense of chop in this expression
or aggrieved, often about a particular originated in the Hindi word châp meaning
thing; a sense of inferiority characterized official stamp. Europeans in the Far East
by a quickness to take offence, informal extended the use of the word to cover
documents such as passports to which an
In 1830 the Long Island Telegraph official stamp or impression was attached
described the practice which gave rise to this and in China it came to mean branded
expression: When two churlish boys were goods. From this, in the late 19th century,
determined to fight, a chip would be placed chop was used to refer to something that had
on the shoulder of one, and the other class or had been validated as genuine or
demanded to knock it off at his peril. good. 
have had your chips be dead, dying, or out of 1947 Dan Davin The Gorse Blooms Pale know
contention. British informal it not been much chop so far but we re only
getting started. 
when the chips are w you find
yourself in a very serious and difficult chord
situation, informalstrike or touch a chord say or do something
0 Chips in this phrase, and in have had your which affects or stirs the emotions of
chips above, are gambling chips. 
others. strike or touch the right cord skilfullychoice appeal to or arouse a particular emotion in
Hobson choice no choice at all. others. 
Thomas Hobson, to whom this expression chuck
refers, was a carrier at Cambridge in the early chuck it rain heavily, informal
17th century, who would not allow his clients
their own choice of horse from his stables as chump
he insisted on hiring them out in strict
rotation. They were offered the choice of off your crazy. British informal
the horse nearest the door or none at all. 
The literal sense of chump meaning a
Hobson choice is also mid 20th-century
broad, thick block of wood led in the midI British rhyming slang for voice. 
19th century to its humorous use to mean
head , with the implication of blockhead. chop
bust someone chops nag or criticize cigar
someone. North American informal close but no cigar of an attempt almost
but not quite successful. North American
bust your chops exert yourself. North American
informalinformal
chop and change change your opinions or This phrase possibly originated as a
behaviour repeatedly and abruptly, often consoling comment to or about a man who
put up a good, but not winning, performance for no good reason. British informalin a competition or contest of strength in
B th chop and change originally had the which the prize was a cigar. 
sense of barter , exchange , or buy and sell , but as this sense of chop became dated the
1995 Nick Hornby High Fidelity But, you
meaning of the whole expression shifted to
know... you did not represent my last andits present one. 
best chance of a relationship. So, you know,
nice try. Close, but no cigar. cinder 54cinder clanger
burnt to a cinder: see BURNT. drop a clanger: see DROP. circle clap
circle the wagons of a group unite in clap eyes on: see EYE. 
defence of a common interest. North American clap hold of grab someone or something
informal roughly or abruptly, informal
In South Africa the Afrikaans word laager, clap someone in jail or irons put someone
meaning a defensive circle of ox wagons , is ; in prison or in chains. 
used in similar metaphorical contexts. The meaning of clap in these idioms is
come or turn full circle return to a past somewhat removed from the original one of make a sudden explosive sound. Overtime
position or situation, often in a way the word developed the additional sense of considered to be inevitable. make a sudden action , without necessarily
implying any sound. go round in circles do something for a long
time without achieving anything but
purposeless repetition, informal clapper
run round in circles be fussily busy with little like the clappers very fast or very hard. British
informalresult, informal
the wheel has turned or come full circle Cappersmayrefertothestrikingpartofa ;
bell, or it may refer to a device in a mill for
the situation has returned to what it was in striking or shaking the hopper in order to
the past, as if completing a cycle. make the grain move down to the millstones, This phrase comes from Shakespeare The phrase like the clappers developed as
King Lear. The wheel is come full circle. The mid 20th-century RAF slang, and is sometimes wheel referred to is that which the goddess found in the form like the clappers of hell. 
Fortune was said to turn as a symbol of
random luck or change. 1992 Jeff Torrington Swing Hammer Swing!
Why should a hearse be going like the clappers
circus through the streets of Glasgow at this time of
night?a three-ring circus Qa circus with three
rings for simultaneous performances. a claret
public spectacle, especially one with little
substance. tap a person claret make a person nose
01998 Spectator Along the way, these bleed by a blow with the fist, informal
meetings have lost all that might have made
them worthwhile... and have turned into a class
travelling three-ring circus. a class act a person or thing displaying
impressive and stylish excellence, informal
citizencitizen of the world a person who is at home claw
in any country. get your claws into enter into a possessive
relationship with someone used especially
civilization of a woman who dominates or manipulates
the end of civilization as we know it: see a man, informal
END. clayclaim have feet of clay: see FOOT. claim to fame a reason for being regarded as
unusual or noteworthy often used when clean
the reason cited is comical, bizarre, or clean as a whistle extremely clean or
trivial. clear, free of incriminating evidence. 
informal
clam a clean bill of health: see BILL. 
happy as a clam: see happy as a sandboy at a clean sheet or slate an absence of existing
HAPPY. restraints or commitments. 55 climbing
2003 Guardian Given a clean slate and an clear the decks prepare for a particular
impressive budget, would love to event or goal by dealing beforehand
programme a festival... that exposed with anything that might hinder
audiences to completely new forms of music-progress. 
making at their best and most diverse. 
clean someone clock Ogive someone a the literal sense, clear the decks meant beating. defeat or surpass someone to remove obstacles or unwanted items from decisively. North American informal the decks of a ship before a battle at sea. 
Clock is used here in the slang sense of in clear not in code. 
face. 1966 Robert Sheckley Mindswap Thus, he
crosscircuited his fear of embarrassment, and
clean house eliminate corruption or spoke to his oldest friend in clear. 
inefficiency. North American in the clear no longer in danger or
clean up your act behave in a more suspected of something, with nothing to
acceptable manner, informal hinder someone in achieving something. 
come clean be completely honest and frank. out of a clear blue sky as a complete
informal surprise. 
have clean hands or keep your hands clean 1992 New Yorker The latest revelations... 
be uninvolved and blameless with regard about the marriage of the Prince and Princess
of Wales may have induced disbelief, but they
to an immoral act. did not come out of a clear blue sky. 
keep a clean sheet in a football match
prevent the opposing side from scoring. cleft
keep your nose clean: see NOSE. be or be caught in a cleft stick be in a
difficult situation, when any action you
make a clean breast of something or of it take will have adverse consequences, chiefly
confess your mistakes or wrongdoings. British
In former times, many people believed
that the breast or chest was where a person Cleft is one of the forms of the past
conscience was located. The breast is still used participle of cleave, in its basic meaning of
metaphorically to represent the seat of the divide with a cutting blow or split. The
emotions. other form still current in standard English is
cloven, and the two words tend to be used in
make a clean sweep remove all unwanted different contexts: we find a cleft stick and a people or things ready to start afresh, cleft palate but a cloven hoof. win all of a group of similar or related
sporting competitions, events, or
matches. clever
too clever by half annoyingly proud of your
Mr Clean an honourable or incorruptible intelligence or skill, informal
politician. click
cleaner click into place become suddenly clear and
take someone to the cleaners take all of understandable. 
someone money or possessions in a
dishonest orunfairway. inflict a crushing Click into place is used literally of an
defeat on someone. object, especially part of a mechanism,
to mean fall smoothly into its allotted
position. clear
clear the air defuse or clarify an angry, tense, click your fingers at: see snap your fingers at
or confused situation by frank discussion. at FINGER. 
This expression comes from the idea that a thunderstorm makes the air less humid. climbhave a mountain to climb: see MOUNTAIN. 
clear as a bell: see BELL. 
as clear as day very easy to see or understand. climbing
clear as mud not at all easy to understand. be climbing the walls feel frustrated,
informal helpless, and trapped, informalclip 56
dip secretive or furtive way; hidden frompublic view. 
at a clip at a time; all at once. US informal
2000 Anthony Bourdain Kitchen Confidential a closed book a thing of which you have no
peeled 75 pounds of shrimp at a clip. knowledge or understanding. 
1944 Frank Clune The Red Heart The desert is
clip someone wings prevent someone
an open book to the man of the Vast Open
from acting freely. Spaces, but to the schoolmaster it was a
Clip someone wings comes from the closed book. 
phrase clip a bird wings, which means trim ! the feathers of a bird so that it cannot fly. closet
out of the closet out into the open, informal
clock Closet, the normal North American term
round or around the clock al ay and all for cupboard or wardrobe , is used in the
night; ceaselessly. Bible to typify privacy and seclusion for
1992 Susan Sontag The Volcano Lover The example in Luke 12:3: that which ye have
mountain was... guarded round the clock by a spoken in the ear in closets shall be
ring of armed soldiers mounted on nervous proclaimed upon the housetops. Come out 
horses. of the closet means cease hiding a secret
about yourself or make public your
turn back the clock return to the past or to a intentions. It is now most commonly, though
previous way of doing things. not always, used in connection with someone
making their homosexuality public. 
watch the clock wait eagerly for the end of
working hours. 1998 Spectator The Prime Minister entourage
It is from this expression that the word could not conceal its glee at the results of their
dock-watcher has developed, referring to boss coming out of the closet. 
someone who is determined not to work
more than their allotted hours. cloud
on cloud nine extremely happy. 
clog On cloud nine refers to a ten-part
clogs to clogs in three generations the classification of clouds in which nine was
return of a family to poverty after one second highest. A dated variant of the
generation of prosperity. expression is on cloud seven. 

close a silver lining: see SILVER. 
close to the bone: see BONE. under a cloud under suspicion or dis close the door on: see DOOR. credited. 
1992 Alasdair Gray Poor Things The career of
close to home: see HOME. this once famous soldier began as well as
close your mind to: see MIND. ended under a cloud. 
close ranks: see RANK. with your head in the clouds of a person
close shave or call a narrow escape from out of touch with reality; daydreaming. 
danger or disaster, informal
close to or close on of an amount almost; cloven hoof
very nearly. a cloven hoof a symbol or indication ofevil. 
run someone close almost match the same
standards or level of achievement as Traditional pictures of the Devil show him someone else. with the head and torso of a man but the legs and cloven hoofs of a goat. Therefore, atoo close for comfort dangerously or
cloven hoof is a giveaway sign of the Devil. 
uncomfortably near. 
too close to call of a contest, race, etc. so 1959 François Mauriac A Woman of Pharisees
evenly balanced that it is impossible to She had been a trial to him from the
predict the outcome with confidence. beginning, and now the cloven hoof was
beginning to show. informalclosed clover
behind closed doors of an action done in a in clover in ease and luxury. 
57 cock
This sense of the phrase is a reference to This phrase is of biblical origin: if
: clover being particularly attractive to thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst,
livestock, as in the expression happy as a pig give him drink: for in so doing thou shalt
in clover. heap coals of fire on his head Romans 12:20. Iclub coalface
in the club or the pudding club pregnant. at the coalface engaged in work at an active
British informal rather than a theoretical level in a
1993 Carl MacDougall The Lights Below Must be particular field. British
serious if you re drinking with the old man. 1998 Town and Country Planning Workers at the
Did you stick her in the club? coalface of sustainable development need
join or welcome to the club used as a these success stories. 
humorous exclamation to express
solidarity with someone else who is coast
experiencing problems or difficulties that the coast is clear there is no danger of being
the speaker has already experienced. observed or caught. 
The coast is clear originally meant that
clutch there were no enemies guarding a sea coast
clutch at straws: see STRAW. who would prevent an attempt to land or
embark. coachdrive a coach and horses through make coat-tail
something entirely useless or ineffective. 
on someone coat-tails undeservedly
British. 
benefiting from another success. 
A early example of this idiom is found in 1964 Economist Mr Robert Kennedy cannot be
this statement by the Irish lawyer Stephen sure ofridingthe coat-tails of Mr Johnson in
Rice 1637-1715: wil rive a coach and six New York. 
horses through the Act of Settlement. Early
versions of the phrase also referto a space big cob
enough to turn a coach and six or four i. have or get a cob on be annoyed or in a bad
horses in, but the context, following Rice  
m d. British informal
declaration, is very often that of rendering a
law or regulation ineffective. cobweb
1997 Spectator A coach and horses was driven blow or clear away the cobwebs banish a
through one of the guiding principles of state of lethargy; enliven or refresh
American statecraft. yourself. coal cock
coals to Newcastle something brought
or sent to a place where it is already a cock-and-bull story a ridiculous and
plentiful. implausible story. 
The expression talk of a cock and a bull is Coal from Newcastle-upon-Tyne in
recorded from the early 17th century, and
northern England was famously abundant in japparently refers to an original story or fable previous centuries, and carry coals to
which is now lost. 
Newcastle has been an expression for anunnecessary activity since the mid 17thcentury. 
at full cock: see FULL. at half cock: see HALF. 
haul someone over the coals reprimand cock a snook at: see SNOOK. 
someone severely. cock of the walk someone who dominates
This expression originated in a form of others within a group. 
torture that involved dragging the victim
over the coals of a slow fire. The places in which cocks bred for
fighting were kept were known as walks:
heap coals of fire on someone head go one cock would be kept in each walk
and would tolerate no other birds in its
out of your way to cause someone to feelspace. remorse. Britishcocked hat 58
cock your ear listen attentively to or for 1986 Dudley Moore Off-Beat He was just one of
something. a number of distinguished composers who
have shuffled off their mortal coil in a variety
The image here is of a dog raising its ears of unusual ways. to an erect position. 
cointhe other side of the coin the opposite or
cocked hat contrasting aspect of a matter. Compare
knock something into a cocked hat Qpiit awith the reverse of the medal at MEDAL. 
definitive end to something, be very
much better than someone or something. pay someone back in their own coin
retaliate by similar behaviour. 
A cocked hat is a hat with the brim
permanently turned up, especially a style of
to coin a phrase said ironically when
three-cornered hat worn from the late 18th introducing a banal remark or cliché. 
century to the early 19th century said when introducing a new expression
or a variation on a familiar one. cockle coincidence
warm the cockles of someone heart give the long arm of coincidence: see ARM. 
someone a comforting feeling of pleasure
or contentment. coldTnis catch a cold or catch cold become
phrase perhaps arose as a result of
the resemblance in shape between a heart infected with a cold. encounter trouble
and a cockleshell. or difficulties, especially financial ones. 
informal0 2001 Financial Times Most observers expect
cocoa house prices to rise... depending on whether
should cocoa or coco should say so. British the UK economy continues to grow smoothly
rhyming slang or whether it catches a cold from the US. 
1996 Melvin Burgess Junk He said, Someone ll as cold as charity very cold. 
really buy it and it ll be theirs then. should cold comfort poor or inadequate
coco, said. consolation. code
This expression, together with the
bring something up to code renovate an old previous idiom, reflects a traditional view
building or update its features in line with that charity is often given in a perfunctory or the latest building regulations. North American uncaring way. The words cold as the
opposite of encouraging and comfort have coign been associated since the early 14th century, coign of vantage a favourable position for but perhaps the phrase is most memorably
observation or action, literary linked for modern readers with the title of
1 Stella Gibbons 1933 parody of sentimental
T itéra sense of a coign of vantage is a novels of rural life, Cold Comfort Farm. 
projecting corner of a wall or building ; the
phrase appears in Shakespeare Macbeth in cold feet loss of nerve or confidence. 
Duncan description of the nesting places of
in the cold light of day when you have
the swifts at Macbeth castle. The word
quoin meaning an external angle of a had time to consider a situation
building still exists in English, butthe archaic objectively. 
spelling coign survives mainly in this phrase. the cold shoulder a show of intentional
unfriendliness; rejection. 
coil : The verb cold-shoulder, meaning reject
shuffle off this mortal coi ie. literary or be deliberately unfriendly , comes from
this phrase. 
Shuffle off this mortal coil is a quotation from Shakespeare Hamlet. This mortal coil is go cold turkey suddenly and completely stop
sometimes used independently to mean the taking drugs. 
fact or state of being alive , with the
suggestion that this is a troublesome state, The image is of one of the possible
since coil retains here its archaic sense of unpleasant side effects of this, involving
turmoil. bouts of shivering and sweating that cause
59 come
goose flesh o: goose pimples, a bumpy see the colour of someone money receive
condition of the skin which resembles the some evidence of forthcoming payment
flesh of a dead plucked turkey. from a person. 
have someone cold have someone at yourmercy. US informa! colours
1988 Rodney Hall Kisses of the Enemy He waited nail or pin your colours to the mast declare
in his office for news of violence, knowing openly and firmly what you believe or
that then he would have the troublemakers favour. cold. 
sail under false colours disguise your true
in cold blood without feeling or mercy; nature or intentions. 
ruthlessly. show your true colours reveal your real
According to medieval physiology blood character or intentions, especially when
was naturally hot, and so this phrase refers to these are disreputable or dishonourable. 
an unnatural state in which someone can
carry out a hot-blooded deed of passion or with flying colours: see FLYING. 
violence without the normal heating of the The distinguishing ensign orflag of a ship ! blood. Compare with make your blood curdle or regiment was known as its colours, and the and make your blood run cold at BLOOD. word is used in this sense in these four idioms, A ship on illegal business or in time of war
leave someone cold fail to interest or excite may fly a bogus flag in order to deceive and
someone. would therefore be sailing under false
left out in the cold ignored; neglected. colours. out cold completely unconscious. 
pour or throw cold water on bediscouraging or negative about a plan orcolumn
suggestion. dodge the column: see DODGE. 
1998 New Scientist When put it to... the fifth column: see F F 
health minister, that perhaps all clinical trial
results should be published, she threw cold come
water on the idea. as — as they come used to describe someone
or something that is a supreme example of
collar the quality specified. 
feel someone collar arrest or legally 1991 Daily Telegraph The petrol-engined V-8
was as silky as they come. 
apprehend someone. 
come the — play the part of; behave like. 
The image here is of using a person informal
collar as a means of getting a secure grip on 1992 Jeff Torrington Swing Hammer Swing!
them. Don come the innocent with me. come the acid: see ACID. 
collision come apart at the seams: see SEAM. 
on a collision course adopting an approach come clean: see CLEAN. 
that is certain to lead to conflict with
another person or group. come in from the cold gain acceptance. informal
This phrase is also used literally to mean 1998 New Scientist Considering that the
going in a direction that will lead to a intracavity technique got off to such a slow
violent crash with another moving object or start, it may, at last, have come in from the
person. cold. 
come it over seek to impose on or to impresscolour deceptively, informal
lend or give colour to make something come it strong go to excessive lengths; use
seem true or probable. exaggeration, informal1991 J. Rusbridger The Intelligence Game
come of age: see AGE. 
Nothing should be done that would lend
colour to any suggestion that it the Security come off it! said when vigorously expressing
Service is concerned with the interests of any disbelief, informal
particular section of the community. come to grief: see GRIEF. comfort 60
come the old soldier over someone seek to may a Shakespearean phrase used in his play !
impose something on someone, especially about the great exponent of the common
touch, King Henry V, on the eve of the battle on grounds of greater experience or age. 
of Agincourt: a little touch of Harry in theinformalnight. 
come to that or if it comes to that said to
introduce an additional significant point. 1910 Rudyard Kipling 1If you can talk with
informal crowds and keep your virtue, Or walk with
Kings—nor lose the common touch ... 
1998 Martin Booth The Industry of Souls amsure you would not wish your son to hear of his
father waywardness. Or your wife, come to company
that. be or err in good company be in the same
come to think of it said when an idea or situation as someone important or
point occurs to you while you are respected. speaking. compare
come up smelling of roses: see SMELLING. compare notes exchange ideas, opinions,
or information about a particularcomfort subject. too — for comfort causing physical or
mental unease by an excess of the specifiedquality. compliment
1994 Janice Galloway Foreign Parts They were return the compliment Ogive a compliment
all too at peace with themselves, too in return for another. retaliate or respond
untroubled for comfort. in kind. 
coming conclusionhave it coming to you be due for retribution ump or leap to conclusions or the
on account of something bad that you have conclusion that make a hasty judgement
done, informal or decision before learning or considering
all the facts. not know if you are coming or going be
try conclusions with engage in a trial of skill
confused, especially as a result of being or argument with, formal
very busy, informal 1902 G. S. Whitmore The Last Maori War in New
where someone is coming from someone Zealand Te Kooti prestige enormously
meaning, motivation, or personality. increased by an apparent unwillingness to try
informal conclusions with him, even with an
immensely superior force and in the opencommando plains. 
go commando wear no underpants, informal
concretecommon be set in concrete of a policy or idea be fixed
common or garden of the usual or ordinary and unalterable. 
type. British informalCommon or garden was originally usedconjure
to describe a plant in its most familiar a name to conjure with a person who is
domesticated form, g. the common or important within a particular sphere of
garden nightshade. activity. 
1964 Leonard Woolf Letter certainly do not The image here is of magically
agree that the unconscious mind reveals summoning a spirit to do your bidding by
deeper truths about someone else than invoking a powerful name or using a spell. 
plain common or garden common sense
does. 1954 Iris Murdoch Under the Net His name,
little known to the public, is one to conjure
the common touch the ability to get on with with in Hollywood. 
or appeal to ordinary people. 
An obsolete sense of common which conspicuous
comes from Latin communis meaning conspicuous by your absence obviously
affable may have influenced this phrase, as not present in a place where you should be. 
61 cookie
This phrase was coined by Lord John of words associating objects or ideas which
Russell in a speech made in 1859. He are incompatible. 
acknowledged as his source for the idea a 1994 Toronto Life Veggie burger?— a
passage in Tacitus describing a procession of contradiction in terms had no wish to argue
images at a funeral: the fact that those of with: vegetables arefineand necessary, but in
Cassius and Brutus were absent attracted a their place. 
great deal of attention. 
conviction
conspiracy have the courage of your convictions: see
a conspiracy of silence an agreement to say COURAGE. 
nothing about an issue that should be
generally known. cooee
This expression appears to have within cooee of within reach of; near to. 
originated with the French philosopher
Auguste Comte 1798-1857. Cooee originated as an Aboriginal
word used as a shout to attract attention,
and was adopted by European settlers
contempt in Australia. The literal meaning of the
phrase within cooee of is within hailing
hold someone or something in contemptdistance of. 
consider someone or something to be
unworthy of respect or attention. 
" formal legal contexts, holdingcook
someone in contempt means that they cook the books alter records, especially
are judged to have committed the offence of accounts, with fraudulent intent or in
contempt of court, i. they are guilty of order to mislead, informal
disrespect or disobedience to the authority
of a court in the administration of justice. Cook has been used since the mid 17th
century in this figurative sense of tamperwith or manipulate. content
to your heart content to the full extent of cook on the front burner be on the right
your desires. lines; be on the way to rapid success. NorthAmerican informal
Heart content was used by Shakespeare in Henry VI, Part2 1593 and in The Merchant Another version of this phrase is cook
of Venice 1596 in the sense of complete with gas. inward satisfaction. 
cook someone goose spoil someone  
plans; cause someone downfall, informalcontention
The underlying idea of this phrase seems !
bone of contention: see BONE. to be that a goose was cherished and
fattened up for a special occasion, and
contest therefore to cook it prematurely meant to no contest a decision by the referee to spoil the plans for a feast. 
declare a boxing match invalid on thetoo many cooks spoil the broth if too
grounds that one or both of the boxers are
many people are involved in a tasknot making serious efforts. a competi or activity, it will not be done well. 
tion, comparison, or choice of which the proverb
outcome is a foregone conclusion. 1997 Times Too many cooks spoil the broth
This expression is mainly found in the and at Apple there is now the equivalent of
USA, and is perhaps influenced by the plea of Marco Pierre White, Anton Mosimann and
nolo contendere do not wish to contend in Nico Ladenis. 
US law, meaning that the defendant in a
criminal prosecution accepts conviction but does not admit guilt. cookie
the way the cookie crumbles how thingsturn out often used of an undesirable
contradiction but unalterable situation, informal, chiefly
contradiction in terms a statement or group North American
cool 62with your hand in the cookie jar engaged in cord
surreptitious theft from your employer. cut the cord cease to rely on someone or
North American informal
something influential or supportive andbegin to act independently. cool
cool as a cucumber perfectly cool or self- The image here is of the cutting of a
possessed. baby umbilical cord at birth. 
1992 Randall Kenan Let the Dead Bury Their
Dead How many men do you know, black
or white, could bluff, cool as a cucumber, corn
caught butt-naked in bed with a damn corn in Egypt a plentiful supply. 
whore?
This expression comes from the aged
cool your heels: see HEEL. acob instructionsto hissons in Genesis42:2: 
Behold, have heard that there is corn in
coon Egypt: get you down thither, and buy for us from thence. for or in a coon age a very long time. North
American informal
1951 William Styron Lie Down in Darkness corner
haven seen him in a coon age. cut corners: see CUT. 
a gone coon a person or thing in fight your corner defend your position or
desperate straits or as good as dead. US interests. 
informal the four or far corners of the world or
earth remote regions of the earth, far
Coon in these idioms is an informal
abbreviation of raccoon. Raccoons wereaway from each other. 
hunted fortheirfur, and a gone coon was one 1999 Katie Hickman Daughters of Britannia In
that had been cornered so that it could not amongst the fishing boats and the caiques... 
escape. sailed innumerable vessels from all four
corners of the earth. 
in someone corner on someone side;
coop giving someone support. fly the coop: see FLY. 
This idiom and fight your corner are
coot boxing metaphorsand refertothediagonally opposite corners taken by opponents in abald as a coot: see BALD. 
boxing match. Trainers and assistants are in
a boxer corner to offer support and
cop encouragement between rounds. 
cop hold of take hold of. British
paint yourself into a corner: see PAINT. 
A slang word meaning catch , cop turn the corner: see N. 
probably originated in northern English
dialect. corridor
cop a plea engage in plea bargaining. North the corridors of power the senior levels
American of government or administration, where
covert influence is regarded as beingit a fair cop an admission that the speaker
exerted and significant decisions are made. 
has been caught doing wrong and deserves
punishment. This expression comes from the title of
C. P. Snow novel The Corridors of Power
not much cop not very good. British informal 1964. Although most usual with power, the
Cop is used here in the sense of an phrase can be more specifically applied to the
acquisition. most influential levelsof the hierarchy within a particular place or organization, especially ;
1998 Spectator Suddenly everyone has noticed when they are regarded as operating
that the rest of her album... isn actually covertly. The French word coulisse meaning much cop after all. the wings in a theatre and corridor has a
similar figurative sense of the corridor as a
copybook place of negotiation and behind-the-scenes
scheming. 
blot your copybook: see BLOT. 63 courageA North American variant of the phrase is
cost down for the count. In boxing, the count is
cost an arm and a leg: see ARM. the ten-second period, counted out loud by
count the cost: see COUNT. the referee, during which a boxer who has
been knocked to the ground may regain his
cotton wool feet: if he fails to do so he must concede
victory to his opponent. A boxer who
wrap someone in cotton wool be over- managestorisewithinthecountoften issaid
protective towards someone. to beat the count. couch take the count of a boxer be knocked out. 
couch potato someone who watches a lot of
television, eats junk food, and takes little or countenance
no physical exercise, informal out of countenance disconcerted or
unpleasantly surprised. 
Couch potato was a humorous American coinage using the image of a person with the Countenance here has the sense of
physical shape of a potato slouching on a sofa confidence of demeanour or calmness of
or couch. Originally, the phrase relied on a expression. 
pun with tuber in the slang term boob tuber, which referred to someone devoted towatching the boob tube or television. counter
on the couch undergoing psychoanalysis or go counter run or ride against the direction
psychiatric treatment. taken by an animal or person hunted orsought. counsel ln
Britain, the variants hunt counter and
a counsel of despair an action to be taken run counter are also found. 
when all else fails. 
2003 Guardian This is not a counsel of despair. over the counter by ordinary retail pur The argument in favour of the euro can be chase, with no need for a prescription
won, as Winning From Behind, a pamphlet or licence. 
published today by Britain in Europe, argues. under the counter or table with reference
a counsel of perfection advice that is ideal to goods bought or sold surreptitiously and
but not feasible. usually illegally. 
1986 Hall in Home Owner Manual Twice 1994 Coarse Fishing Today The obvious danger
yearly desludging has been recommended but is thatriverfishwill be pinched and flogged
this is probably a counsel of perfection. under the counter. count country
count your chickens treat something that go or appeal to the country test public
has not yet happened as a certainty, informal opinion by dissolving Parliament and
This phrase refers to the proverb don holding a general election. British
count your chickens before they re hatched. line of country a subject about which
a person is skilled or knowledgeable. count the pennies: see PENNY. British
count sheep: see SHEEP. unknown country an unfamiliar place or
count something on the fingers of one hand topic. 
used to emphasize the small number of a
The Latin equivalent, terra incognita, is
particular thing. also used in English. 
1992 Fly Rod and Reel Two decades ago one
could count on thefingersof one hand the
saltwater anglers who had caught a sailfish or
a marlin on a fly. courageDutch courage: see 
count to ten count to ten under your breath have the courage of your convictions act on
in order to prevent yourself from reacting your beliefs despite danger or disapproval. 
angrily to something. 1998 Times The knives were out for us
out for the count unconscious or soundly and we had to have the courage of our
asleep. convictions. 
course 64
take your courage in both hands nerve 1991 Here Health The British diet remains a
yourself to do something that frightens sacred cow. 
you. till the cows come home for an indefinitelylong time, informal
coursestay the course: see STAY. crab
catch a crab in rowing effect a faulty stroke
court in which the oar is jammed under water or
hold court: see HOLD. misses the water altogether. 
crackCoventry crack heads together: see bang heads
send someone to Coventry refuse to
together at BANG. 
associate with or speak to someone, chiefly
British crack a book open a book and read it; study. North American informal
This expression, which dates from the mid
18th century, is thought by some to stem crack a bottle open a bottle, especially of
from the extreme unpopularity of soldiers wine, and drink it. 
stationed in Coventry, who were cut off
socially by the citizens. Another suggestion is crack a crib break into a house. British informal
that the phrase arose because Royalist the crack of dawn very early in the morning. 
prisoners were sent to Coventry during the Crack here means the instant of time
English Civil War, the city being staunchly occupied by the crack of a whip. 
Parliamentarian. crack of doom a peal of thunder announcing
the Day of Judgement. 
coverThe idea of thunder announcing the Last blow someone cover discover or expose
udgement comes from several passages in
someone real identity. the book of Revelation g.6:1, 8:5. 
break cover emerge into the open; suddenly
leave a place of shelter. a fair crack of the whip fair treatment; a
chance to participate or compete on equal
Breac cover originally referred to a
hunted animal emerging from the
terms. British informal
undergrowth in which it had been hiding. 1989 T. M. Albert Tales of the Ulster Detective You
might think that the police concocted the
cover the waterfront cover every aspect of circumstances to deny these men a fair crack
something. North American informal of the whip. 
1999 Tony Parsons Man and Boy And suddenly crack wise make jokes. North American informal
realised how many father figures Luke has,
paper over the cracks: see A R. father figures who seem to cover the
waterfront of parental responsibilities. cracked
cover your back foresee and avoid the cracked up to be asserted to be used to
possibility of attack or criticism, informal indicate that someone or something has
cover your tracks conceal evidence of what been described too favourably, informal
you have done. This expression stems from the use of
crack as an adjective to mean pre-eminent ,
COW a sense dating from the late 18th century. 
have a cow become angry, excited, or
1986 Willy Russell Shirley Valentine Our Brian
agitated. North American informal
suddenly realised that the part of Joseph
1990 Susin Nielsen Wheels Don have a cow, wasn as big as it had been cracked up to be. 
she said huffily. It no big deal. 
a sacred cow an idea, custom, or institution crackers
held, especially unreasonably, to be above go crackers become insane; go mad. 
questioning or criticism. become extremely annoyed or angry. 
Sacred cow originally referred to the cracking
veneration of the cow as a sacred animal in get cracking act quickly and energetically. 
the Hindu religion. informal65 croppercrackling creep
a bit of crackling an attractive woman give someone the creeps induce a feeling of
regarded as a sexual object. British informal fear or revulsion in someone. 
1968 Peter Dickinson Skin Deep You know 1996 Roddy Doyle The Woman Who Walked Into
her? do, sir. Nice bit of crackling, she is. Doors It the emptiness; there no one on the
street at that time, along the river. It gives mecramp the creeps. 
cramp someone style prevent a person make your flesh creep or crawl: see FLESH. 
from acting freely or naturally, informal
crestcrash on the crest of a wave at a very successful
crash and burn fail spectacularly. North point. 
American informal1994 Hispanic But if you use Spanish, be cricket
careful not to crash and burn... the not cricket contrary to traditional standards
language is booby-trapped for the unwary of fairness or rectitude. British informal
PR professional. The game of cricket, with its traditional
craw : regard for courtesy and fair play, has been a stick in your craw make you angry or metaphor for these qualities since at least the : mid 19th century. irritated. Literally, this phrase means stick in your
throat. A craw is the crop of a bird or insect; crimp
the transferred sense of the word to refer to a put a crimp in have an adverse effect on. 
person gullet, originally humorous, is now informal
almost entirely confined to this expression. 1990 Walter Stewart Right Church, Wrong
Compare with stick in your gizzard Pew Well, that maybe puts a crimp in my
at GIZZARD. theory. 
crazy crispburnt to a crisp: see burnt to a cinder at
crazy like a fox very cunning or shrewd. BURNT. creature
creature of habit a person who follows an crocodile
unvarying routine. shed or weep crocodile tears put on a
display of insincere grief. 
credit This expression draws on the ancient
credit where credit is due praise should be belief that crocodiles wept while luring or
given when it is deserved, even when you devouring their prey. 
are reluctant to give it. This sentiment was earlier expressed in crook
the form honour where honour is due,
be crook on be annoyed by. Australian & New
following the Authorized Version of the
Bible: Render therefore to all their dues: Zealand informal
tribute to whom tribute is due; custom to go crook lose your temper; become
whom custom; fear to whom fear; honour to
angry, become ill. Australian & New Zealand
whom honour Romans 13:7. informal
Crook in late 19th-century Australian
creek slang meant bad or unpleasant. 
be up the creek without a paddle be in
0 1 5 0 Coast to Coast 1949-50 What you do
severe difficulty, usually with no means of
if you were expelled? old man go crook,
extricating yourself from it. informal bet. Often shortened to be up the creek, this
expression is recorded in the mid 20th century cropper
as military slang for lost for example, whilecome a cropper fall heavily. suffer a
on a patrol. defeat or disaster, informalcross 66
Sense 1 appears to have originated in mid cross the Rubicon: see RUBICON. 
19th-century hunting jargon, and possibly cross swords have an argument or
camefromthephraseneccanccropmeaning idispute. bodily or completely. 
Originally, this expression had the literal
01980 Shirley Hazzard The Transit of Venus He
sense of fight a duel. had seen how people came a cropper by giving
way to impulse. have your cross to bear suffer the troublesthat life brings. cross
The reference here is to Jesus or Simon of jat cross purposes misunderstanding or
Cyrene carrying the Cross to Calvary before
having different aims from one another. 
the Crucifixion. The image is also used
cross as two sticks very annoyed or grumpy. metaphorically in the New Testament for
British informal example, in Matthew 10:38: And he that
taketh not his cross and followeth after me is This expression is a play on the two senses not worthy of me. 
of cross, firstly bad-tempered and secondly intersecting. crossed
cross your fingers or keep your fingers get your wires or lines crossed have a
crossed hope that your plans will be misunderstanding. 
successful; trust in good luck. 
Wires being crossed originally referred to The gesture of putting your index and a faulty telephone connection a crossed
middle fingers across each other as a sign of line , which resulted in another call or calls
hoping for good luck is a scaled-down version being heard. 
of the Christian one of making the sign of the Cross with your whole hand and arm as a
request for divine protection. It is also crossfire
superstitiously employed when telling a be caught in the crossfire suffer damage
deliberate lie, with the idea of warding or harm inadvertently as the result of the
off the evil that might be expected to
conflict between two other people or
befall a liar. groups. 
1998 Spectator Since resources were limited
The literal sense of the phrase, in a
... the only hope the clients had was to hang
military context, is be trapped and possibly in there,fingerscrossed. killed by being between two opposing sides cross the floor join the opposing side in who are shooting at each other. 
Parliament. British
1998 New Scientist This suggested that the
The floor of the House of Commons is corneal cells are innocent victims caught in
the open space separating members of the the crossfire as cellsfightthe viral infection. 
Government and Opposition parties, who sit on benches facing each other across it. crossroads
at a or the crossroads at a critical point,
cross my heart used to emphasize thewhen decisions with far-reaching con truthfAilness and sincerity of what you are
sequences must be made. saying or promising, informal
dirty work at the crossroads: see DIRTY. The full version of this expression is cross 
my heart and hope to die, and is sometimes crow
reinforced by making a sign of the Cross over your chest. as the crow flies used to refer to a shorter
distance in a straight line across country
cross someone palm with silver pay rather than the distance as measured along
someone for a favour or service, often a more circuitous road. 
humorous eat crow: see EAT. 
Crossing someone palm with silver was originally connected with the telling of crowd
fortunes, when the client would literally tracecrowd the mourners exert undue pressure
out the sign of a cross on the hand of the
on someone. US informalfortune-teller with a silver coin. 
pass in a crowd: see A S. 67 cudcrowning cry stinking fish disparage your own efforts
or products. crowning glory the best and most notable
aspect of something a person hair. This expression stems from the practice of !
informal street vendors crying their wares i. 
shouting and praising their goods to attract cruel customers. If a vendor were to cry stinking
fish , he could not expect to attract many. 
be cruel to be kind act towards someone in a
way which seems harsh but will ultimately 1991 Independent on Sunday want to use the
be of benefit. Home Affairs Committee Report for those in
racing to go forward together and at last to
In Shakespeare Hamlet, must be cruel stop crying stinking fish. 
only to be kind was Hamlet explanation of 
his reasons for bullying his mother about her cry wolf: see WOLF. 
second marriage. in full cry expressing an opinion loudly and
forcefully. 
cruising Full cry originated and is still used as a
cruising for a bruising heading or looking for hunting expression referring to a pack of
trouble, informal, chiefly North American hounds all baying in pursuit of their quarry. 
1998 Times The problem... is the unrealistic
value of the Hong Kong dollar... it has been great or much cry and little wool a lot of
cruising for a bruising for most of last year. fuss with little effect; a lot of fuss about
nothing. 
crumb ! This expression comes from the idea of
crumbs from someone or a rich man shearing pigs, where the result could be
table an unfair and inadequate or : expected to be great cry and little wool. 
unsatisfactory share of something. 
Luke 16:21 describes the beggar Lazarus crying
as desiring to be fed with the crumbsfor crying out loud used to express your
which fell from the rich man table. 
irritation or impatience, informal
1941 Rebecca West Black Lamb and Grey Falcon
crunch For crying out loud, why did you do it?
when or if it comes to the crunch when or
if a point is reached or an event occurs crystal
such that immediate and decisive action is crystal clear completely transparent and
required, informal unclouded, unambiguous; easilyunderstood. cruse
a widow cruse: see WIDOW. cuckoo
cry cuckoo in the nest an unwelcome intruder in
a place or situation. 
cry for the moon: see MOON. 
cry foul protest strongly about a real or The female cuckoo often lays its eggs in
other birds nests. Once hatched, the cuckoo imagined wrong or injustice. 
fledgling pushes the other birds fledglings
Foul in this context means foul play, a out of the nest. 
violation of the rules of a game to which
attention is drawn by shouting foul! cucumber
1998 Times She can cry foul when subjected cool as a cucumber: see COOL. 
to fair and standard competition. 
cry from the heart a passionate and honest cud
appeal or protest. chew the cud of a ruminant animal
The French equivalent en ce coeur has further chew partly digested food, think
also been in use in English since the early 20th or talk reflectively. 
century 1 9 2 We chewed the cud, drank a few
beers and at the end of the meal, Malu asked if
cry over spilt milk: see MILK. wanted to hit a club. 
cudgel 68
cudgel not your cup of tea not what you like or are
interested in. informal
cudgel your brain or brains think hard
about a problem. curate
This expression was used by Shakespeare a curate egg something that is partly good
in Hamlet Cudgel thy brains no more about and partly bad. 
it - !This expression stems from a Punch
take up the cudgels start to support cartoon produced in 1895, showing a meek
someone or something strongly. curate breakfasting with his bishop, BISHOP:
m afraid you ve got a bad egg, Mr Jones. 
CURATE: Oh no, my Lord, assure you! Partscue of it are excellent!
on cue at the correct moment. 
take your cue from follow the example or curdle
advice of. make your blood curdle: see BLOOD. 
Cue in both of these idioms is used in the theatrical sense of the word or words that curiosity
signal when another actor should speak or curiosity killed the cat being inquisitive
perform a particular action. about other people affairs may get youinto trouble, proverbcuff curl
off the cuff without preparation, informal curl the mo succeed brilliantly; win. Australian 
This expression refersto impromptu notes informal
made on a speaker shirt cuffs as an aid to
make someone hair curl shock or horrify memory. someone, informal
on the cuff Oon credit. US informal beyond This expression may have developed in
what is appropriate or conventional. New the mid 20th century as a dramatic or
Zealand humorous variation of make someone hair 0 1 9 2 Sandra Birdsell The Chrome Suite Their stand on end see HAIR. 
surveillance system keeps a beady eye open
and they don let you buy groceries on the out of curl lacking energy. British
cuff. This is an early 20th-century expression
based on the idea that curly hair has vitality
culture as in bouncy curls. Therefore, hair which
has become limp or out of curl may be
culture vulture a person who is verythoughtto indicate listlessness or enervation, interested in the arts, especially to an
obsessive degree. The image of a iurure here is of a greedy jcurrent
and often undiscriminating eater. pass current be generally accepted as true or
genuine. British
Pass current originally referred to the
cup ! currency of a genuine coin, as opposed to a
in your cups while drunk, informal counterfeit one. 
n your cups is now used mainly to mean
drunk , but in former times the phrase could also mean during a drinking bout. Either curry
could be intended in the passage in the curry favour ingratiate yourself with
Apocrypha regarding the strength of wine: someone through obsequious behaviour. 
And when they are in their cups, they forget their love both to friends and brethren, and a Curry here means groom a horse or other
little after draw out swords 1 Esdras 3:22. animal with a coarse brush or comb. The
phrase is an early 16th-century alteration of
1948 Vladimir Nabokov Letter have received the Middle English curry favel, Favel or
your letter... and can only excuse its contents Fauvel being the name of a chestnut horse in
by assuming that you were in your cups when an early 14th-century French romance who
you wrote it. epitomized cunning and duplicity. From this
69 cut
to groom Favel came to mean to use on him cut both ways of a point or statement
the cunning which he personified. It is serve both sides of an argument, of an
unclear whether the bad reputation of action or process have both good and bad
chestnut horses existed before the French effects. 
romance, but the idea is also found in 15th century German in the phrase den fahlen Theimagebehindthisexpressionisthatof hengst reiten ride the chestnut horse a double-edged weapon see double-edged
meaning behave deceitfully. sword at DOUBLE-EDGED. 
01998 Sanjida Connell Angel Bird Words
curtain have the power to cut both ways and was not
bring down the curtain on bring to an end. strong enough to wield them
cut corners undertake something in what
The curtain referred to is the one lowered !
at the front of the stage in a theatre at the
appears to be the easiest, quickest, or
end of a performance. cheapest way, often by omitting to do
something important or ignoring rules. 
custom "This phrase comes from cutting off the
corner, which means taking the shortest
old Spanish customs: see SPANISH. 
course by going across and not round a
cut corner. 
a cut above superior to. informal cut the crap get to the point; state the real
1998 Spectator Samuel was a scholar... and his situation, vulgar slang
contributions are a cut above the rest. cut a dash be stylish or impressive in your
an atmosphere that you could cut with a
dress or behaviour. knife: see ATMOSPHERE. 
be cut out for or to be have exactly the As a noun, dash in the sense of showy
appearance is now found only in this
right qualities for a particular role, task, or
expression, but this sense does also survive in job. informalthe adjective dashing. 
The sense of cut out here is formed or
fashioned by cutting , as the pieces of a cut someone dead completely ignore
garment are cut out from the fabric. someone. 
1992 Paul Auster Leviathan Whenever cut a deal come to an arrangement,
stopped and examined my own behavior, especially in business; make a deal. North
concluded that wasn cut out for marriage. American informal
cut and dried of a situation, issue, or ideas Cut here relates to the informal sense of
completely settled or decided. the noun cut as a share of profits. 

A distinction was originally made cut someone down to size deflate someone  
between the cut and dried herbs sold in
herbalists shops and growing herbs. exaggerated sense of self-worth, informal
cut a — figure present yourself or appear in a
cut and run make a speedy or sudden particular way. 
departure from an awkward or hazardous 1994 Vanity Fair David has cut a dashing figure
situation rather than confront or deal on the international social scene. 
with it. informal cut from the same cloth of the same
Cut and run was originally an early 18th- nature. 
century nautical phrase, meaning sever the 1999 Washington Post The last thing a franchise
anchor cable because of an emergency and needs is for the two most important men at
make sail immediately. the top to be cut from the same cloth. cut in line jump the queue. US
cut and thrust Qa spirited and rapid cut it meet the required standard, informal
interchange of views, a situation or 1998 Spectator Heaven knows how such
sphere of activity regarded as carried out people get jobs in universities; they would not
under adversarial conditions. cut it on Fifteen-to-One. 
In fencing, a cut is a slashing stroke and cut it fine: see FINE. 
a thrust one given with the point of the cut the Gordian knot solve or remove a
weapon. iproblem in a direct or forceful way,cylinder 70
rejecting gentler or more indirect This was originally a nautical expression
methods. suggested by the prominence and
characteristic form of the jib a triangular
The knot referred to is that with which sail set forward of the foremast as the
Gordius, king of ancient Phrygia in Asia identifying characteristic of a ship. 
Minor, fastened the yoke of his wagon to the
pole. Its complexity was such that it gave rise cut a or the rug dance, typically in an
to the legend that whoever could undo it energetic or accomplished way. North
would become the ruler of Asia. When American informal
Alexanderthe Great passed that way en route
1966 Sky Magazine The wide-open spaces
to conquer the East he is said simply to have
around the bar... mean, as itfillsup, the place
severed the knot with his sword. 
soon resembles a club and the punters are
cut it out used to ask someone to stop doing itching to cut a rug. 
or saying something that is annoying or cut someone some slack: see SLACK. 
offensive, informal cut your teeth acquire initial practice or
cut loose distance yourself from a person, experience of a particular sphere of activity
group, or system by which you are unduly or with a particular organization. 
influenced or on which you are over dependent. begin to act without The form cut your eye teeth is also found, restraint, informal The image is that of the emergence of a
0 1 9 3 Isidore Okpewho Tides When the time baby teeth from its gums. 
comes that feel my friends are notcut to the chase come to the point. North
sufficiently behind me in what trying toAmerican informal
do, going to cut loosefromthem. 
cut your losses abandon an enterprise or In this idiom, cut is being used in the
cinematographicsense movetoanothershot course of action that is clearly going to be
in a film. Chase scenes are a particularly
unprofitable or unsuccessful before you exciting feature of some films, and the idiom suffer too much loss or harm. expresses the idea of ignoring any
preliminaries and coming immediately to the The sense of cut here is probably sever
most important part. 
yourself from rather than reduce in size. 

1991 Jane Smiley A Thousand Acres Ginny is cut up rough behave in an aggressive,
eternally hopeful, you know. She never cuts quarrelsome, or awkward way. British informal
her losses. She always thinks things could
change. Cut up is here being used in the sense of behave. The phrase cut up rough is used by cut the mustard come up to expectations; Dickens and the variant cut up savage now
meet the required standard, informal no longer in use by Thackeray. 

Mustard appears in early 20th-century US 1998 Spectator The jury, knowing full well that
slang with the general meaning of the best Clodius supporters could cut up rough, asked
of anything. for and received state protection. 
1998 New Scientist But if you want to go beyond cut your coat according to your cloth
this into hypersonic flight... they just don undertake only what you have the money
cut the mustard. or ability to do and no more, proverb
cut no ice have no influence or effect. have your work cut out: see WORK. 
informal make or miss the cut come up to or fail to
1973 Joyce Porter It Murder with Dover come up to a required standard. 
MacGregor remembered... that logical
argument didn cut much ice with Dover and In golf, a player has to equal or better a
he abandoned it. particular score in order to avoid elimination from the last two rounds of a four-round
cut off or down in their prime
tournament. If the player succeeds, they make 
bring someone life or career to an abrupt the cut. end while they are at the peak of their
abilities. 
the cut of someone jib the appearance or cylinder
look of a person. firing on all cylinders: see FIRING. Dd
your toes up to the daisies, both dating from ;
dab the mid 19th century. 
be a dab hand at be expert at. 
Dab in this sense is recorded since the late ; damage
17th century, but its origin is unknown. 
what the damage? used to ask the cost of
1998 Bookseller Stephanie Cabot... is something, informal
apparently a dab hand at milking cows,
according to one of those mystifying diary dammit
items in Skateboarders Weekly. as near as dammit or damn it as close to
being accurate as makes no difference. dagger informal
at daggers drawn in a state of bitter enmity. The image here is of the drawing ofdamn
daggers as the final stage in a confrontation not give a damn: see GIVE. 
before actual fighting breaks out. Although damn someone or something with faint
recorded in 1668, the expression only became praise praise someone or something so
commonfromtheearly19thcenturyonwards. unenthusiastically as to imply
look daggers at glare angrily or venom- condemnation. 
ously at. This expression comes from the poet
Alexander Pope Epistle to Dr Arbuthnot 
The expression speak daggers is also
1735: Damn with faint praise, assent with
found and is used by Shakespeare Hamlet
civil leer, And without sneering, teach the
in the scene in which he reproaches hisrest to sneer. mother. 
1994 Canadian Defence Quarterly True there is
dag the occasional condescending nod to those
who served, but this frequently amounts to
rattle your dags hurry up. Australian & New damning with faint praise. 
Zealand informalnot be worth a damn have no value or
j Dags are the excreta-clotted lumps of validity at all. informal
j wool at the rear end of a sheep, which, in
heavily fouled animals, rattle as they run. damned
damned if you do and damned if you don t
daisy in some situations whatever you do is likely
fresh as a daisy very bright and cheerful. to attract criticism. 
informal
1998 Spectator Some of the media were critical
of the photo... That did not stop them all
This expression alludes to a daisy running it on the front page. You re damned if
reopening its petals in the early morning or to you do and damned if you don t. 
its welcome appearance in springtime. The
freshness of daisies has been a literary damnedest
commonplace since at least the late 14th do or try your damnedest do or try your
century, when it was used by Chaucer. 
utmost to do something. 
pushing up the daisies dead and buried. The superlative form of the adjective
informa amned is used here as a noun and can mean either yourworst ormoreusuallynow your This phrase, a humorous early 20th- best , depending on the context. 
century euphemism, is now the mostfrequently used of severa aisy-related
expressions for being in the grave. Other Damonidioms include under the daisies and turn
Damon and Pythias two faithful friends. 
damp 72O Phintias the more correct form of the dander
name was condemned to death for plotting ;
against Dionysius of Syracuse. To enableget your dander up lose your temper;
Phintias to go to arrange his affairs, Damon become angry. 
offered to take his friend place in Dionysius The sense of dander in this originally US
prison and to be executed in his stead if he
expression is uncertain, as neither dandruff
failed to return. Phintias returned just in time nor dunder meaning the ferment of
to redeem Damon, and Dionysius was so
molasses seems entirely plausible. 
impressed by their friendship that hepardoned and released Phintias as well. 
dangling
damp keep someone dangling keep someone,
especially a would-be suitor, in an
a damp squib an unsuccessful attempt touncertain position. 
impress; an anticlimax. 
This expression stems from the idea that a dark
squib, a type of small firework, will not have a dark horse a person, especially a
the desired explosive effect if it is damp. competitor, about whom little is known. 
The expression was originally horse-racing damper slang. The earliest recorded use was by
put a or the damper or dampener on have Benjamin Disraeli in 1831: A dark horse,
a depressing, subduing, or inhibiting effect which had never been thought of... rushed
past the grand stand in sweeping triumph. 
on someone or something. keep someone in the dark ensure that
damsel someone remains in a state of ignorance
damsel in distress a young woman in about something. 
trouble, humorous 2003 Village Voice It payback time for an
administration that... has ignored lawmakers
Damsel in distress makes humorous and... deliberately kept them in the dark. 
reference to the ladies in chivalric romances
keep something dark keep something secret
whose sole purpose was to be rescued from
from other people. peril by a knight in shining armour see
1993 New York Review of Books Ottoline was
KNIGHT. !determined to keep her affair with Russell safe
from Bloomsbury prying eyes and she and
dance Russell went to Feydeauesque lengths to keep
their secret dark. 
dance attendance on do your utmost to
please someone by attending to all their a shot or stab in the dark an act whose
needs or requests. outcome cannot be foreseen; a mere guess. 
The expression originally referred to The metaphorical use of in the dark to
someone waiting kicking their heels until an mean in a state of ignorance dates from the important person summoned them or would late 17th century. see them. 
1999 Shyama Perera Haven Stopped Dancing darken
Yet Tammy and sat on a vinyl bench seat and never darken someone door or doorstep
watched the visiting flow while Jan
disappeared to dance attendance on her keep away from someone home
mother. permanently. 
1988 Salman Rushdie The Satanic Verses They
dance to someone tune comply couldn lock her away in any old folks home,
completely with someone demands and sent her whole family packing when they
wishes. dared to suggest it, never darken her doorstep,
lead someone a merry dance cause she told them, cut the whole lot off without a
someone a great deal of trouble or worry. penny or a by your leave. British dash
1993 Isidore Okpewho Tides will be content
to lead my friends at the NSS a merry dance if cut a dash: see CUT. 
only to get even with them for messing me up do your dash exhaust your energies or
the way they did. chances. Australian informal
73 daylight
1973 Chester Eagle Who Could Love the which they are unlikely to be successful. 
Nightingale? Keep going, she said. Keep informal
going. ve done my dash, Marg, in every 1996 Charlie Higson Getting Rid of Mr Kitchen
sense of the words. You are the worst beggar have ever
encountered, said. Don give up the day
date ob. 
a blind date: see BLIND. from day one from the very beginning. 
pass your sell-by date: see PASS. 1996 Christopher Brookmyre Quite Ugly One
Morning The system churns out junior doctors
daunted who have paid bugger-all attention to the
meat and two veg medicine they will find
nothing daunted: see NOTHING. themselves up to their necks in from day one. 
Davy Jones locker have had your or its day be no longer
go to Davy Jones locker be drowned at sea. popular, successful, or influential. 
if he or she is a day at least added to a
Davy Jones is identified in Tobias statement about the age of a person or
Smollett sPereg7nePdre1751as thefiend thing. 
that presides over all the evil spirits of the
1992 Shashi Tharoor Show Business Lawrence
deep , buttheorigin of the name is uncertain. Imust befiftyif he a day. 
ust another day at the office: see OFFICE. 
dawn make a day of it: see MAKE. 
the crack of dawn: see CRACK. make someone day: see MAKE. 
a false dawn: see FALSE. not someone day used to convey that
day someone has suffered a day of successivemisfortunes, informal
all in a day work of something unusual or
problematic accepted as part of someone 1997 A. Sivanandan When Memory Dies He
sighed inwardly, this was not his day. 
normal routine or as a matter of course. 
one of those days a day when several things
at the end of the day: see END. 
go wrong. 
call it a day decide or agree to stop doing a red letter day: see RED. 
something, either temporarily or seen or known better days be in a worse
permanently. state than in the past; have become old,
This expression comes from the idea of worn-out, or shabby. 
having done a day work; in the mid 19th that will be the day something is very
century, the form was call it half a day. unlikely to happen, informal
1991 Alistair Campbell Sidewinder Now for my
carry or win the day be victorious orproposal, which you llfindirresistible. successful. 
"That ll be the day. 
The sense of day used here is the day those were the days used to assert that a
work on the field of battle. 
particular past time was better in
day in, day out continuously or repeatedly comparison with the present. 
1997 Brenda Clough How like a God Those
over a long period of time. were the days, Rob said. B. C. —before
day of reckoning the time when past children! Remember? 
mistakes or misdeeds must be punishedor paid for; a testing time when the
degree of your success or failure will be daylight
revealed. beat the living daylights out of give
someone a very severe beating, informalThis expression refers to the Day of
Judgement, on which, according to Christian : Daylight or daylights has been used from tradition, human beings will have to answer the mid 18th century as a metaphor for eyes , to God for their transgressions. and here has the extended sense of any vital organ of the body. don give up the day job used as a
humorous way of recommending someone burn daylight use artificial light in daytime;
not to pursue an alternative career at waste daylight. 
dead 74
frighten or scare the living daylights out 1990 Film Comment Steward subscribes to the
of give someone a very severe fright. notion that all women are nitwits and
lunkheads, dead from the neck up. 
This expression was a mid 20th-century dead in the water unable to function
development from beat the living daylights
effectively. out of, on the premise that the effect of
extreme fear is as drastic as physical violence, Dead in the water wasoriginallyusedof a !
ship and in this context means unable to
1955 Frank Yerby The Treasure of Pleasant Valleymove. Didn mean to hit him... Meant to throw
close to him and scare the living daylights out 1997 Times And Oasis? Well, they are hardly
of him. dead in the water, having sold three million
see daylight begin to understand what was copies of Be Here Now. 
previously puzzling or unclear. a dead letter a law or practice no longer
observed. 
dead
dead and buried used to emphasize that This phrase was originally used with
reference to passages in the biblical epistles
something is finally and irrevocably in the
in which St Paul compares the life-giving
past. spirit of the New Testament with what he sees ;
dead as a or the dodo Qno longer alive. as the dead letter of the Mosaic law. Later
0 no longer effective, valid, or interesting. until the late 19th century Dead-letter
informal Office was the name given to the
organization that dealt with unclaimed mail !
The name dodo comes from Portuguese or mail that could not be delivered for any
duodo meaning simpleton. It was applied to reason. The expression has been used
the large flightless bird of Mauritius because metaphorically for an obsolete or
the bird had no fear of man and so was easily unobserved law since the mid 17th century. 
killed, being quickly wiped out by visiting
European sailors. The dodo fate has made it 1998 Spectator They were saying on the;
1 proverbial for something that is long dead news... that some provision of the Stormont
and the name has been used metaphorically agreement might end up a dead letter. 
for an old-fashioned, stupid, or unenlight- dead meat in serious trouble, informal
ened person since the 19th century. 1989 Tracy Kidder Among Schoolchildren You re
dead meat, gonna get you after school. 
2000 John Caughie Television Drama The once
pleasant family hour is now as dead as a dodo. dead men shoes: see SHOE. 
dead as a doornail or as mutton the dead of night the quietest, darkest part
completely dead. of the night. 
A doornail was one of the large iron the dead of winter the coldest part of
studs formerly often used on doors for winter. ornamentation or for added strength; the
The sense of dead here and in theword occurred in various alliterative phrases ;
previous idiom developed in the 16th century g. deaf as a doornail and dour as a
from dead time of—, meaning the period
doornail but dead as a doornail is now the
most characterized by lack of signs of life or only one in common use. activity. 
a dead cat bounce a misleading sign of dead on your feet extremely tired, informal
vitality in something that is really
moribund, informal This expression was a development from : the phrase dead tired, as an exaggerated way A dead cat might bounce if it is dropped of expressing a feeling of exhaustion. Dead is from a great height: the fact of it bouncing sometimes also used on its own to mean
does not reliably indicate that the cat is alive exhausted. 
after all. The expression was coined in the late ;
20th century by Wall Street traders to refer to dead to the world fast asleep; unconscious. 
a situation in which a stock or company on a informal
long-term, irrevocable downward trend
2000 Michael Ondaatje Anil Ghost The nurse
suddenly shows a small temporary
tried to wake him, but he was dead to thei improvement. world. 
dead from the neck or chin up stupid. from the dead from a state of death,
informal from a period of obscurity or inactivity. 75 deep
make a dead set at make a determined Be the death of is generally used as an
attempt to win the affections of. British exaggerated or humorous way of describing the effects of laughter, embarrassment,
Dating from the early 19th century, boredom, or similar emotions. 
this was originally a sporting idiom,
referring to the manner in which a dog such 1999 Chris Dolan Ascension Day If her mother
as a setter or pointer stands stock still with its ever found out that William Grant was in
muzzle pointing in the direction of game. Glasgow, it be the death of her. 
be frightened to death be made veryover my dead body used to emphasize that
alarmed and fearful, informal
you completely oppose something and
would do anything to prevent it from be in at the death Qbe present when a
happening, informal hunted animal is caught and killed, be
present when something fails or comes to
wouldn be seen or caught dead in or
with or at — used to express strong dislike an end. 
or disinclination for a particular thing or catch your death of cold catch a severe cold
situation, informal or chill, informal
1997 Independent Kate books, said one a death head at the feast: see FEAST. 
literary editor, can be read happily by those die a or the death come to an end; cease or
who wouldn be seen dead with a Catherine fail to be popular or successful. 
Cookson. 1999 Linedancer Our industry must expand
... otherwise it wil ie a death with just
deaf a few clubs remaining. 
deaf as an adder or a post completely or do something to death perform or repeat
extremely deaf. something so frequently that it becomes
tediously familiar. 
The traditiona eafness of an adder is
based on an image in Psalm 58:4: the deaf a fate worse than death: see F A 
adder that stoppeth her ear. like death a up extremely tired or ill. 
informalfall on deaf ears of a statement or request
be ignored by others. Like death warmed up was originally
1990 Ellen Kuzwayo Sit Down and Listen All military slang, recorded from the 1930s. The efforts by her husband to dissuade her from North American version is like death warmed wishing to leave fell on deaf ears. over. 
a matter of life and death: see F deal
a big deal a thing considered important. deck
informal
not playing with a ful eck mentally
big deal! used to express contempt for deficient. North American informal
something regarded as impressive or
important by another person, informal A deck in this phrase is a pack of playing cards. a raw or rough deal a situation in which
someone receives unfair or harsh on deck ready for action or work. North
treatment, informal American
a square deal a fair bargain or treatment. 
This expression refers to a ship main
Square here has the sense of honest , deck as the place where the crew musters to which as an adjective was associated ! receive orders for action. 
originally with honourable play at cards. See !
also on the square at SQUARE. 
deepdig deep Ogive money or other resources
death generously make a great effort to do
at death door so ill that you may die. something, informal
1994 S. P. Somtow Jasmine Nights How stupid
of me to trouble her with my petty problems The idea here is of thrusting your hands
when she probably at death door! deep into your pockets to find money with
which to pay for something. 
be the death of cause someone death. deliver 76
1991 Sports Illustrated You really have to dig 1948 David Ballantyne The Cunninghams She
deep night after night to get up for every didn like the Baptists though, had a derry on
game. that crowd ever since Hilda took her to an
go off or go in off the deep end give evening service. way immediately to anger or emotion. 
informaldesertsget or receive your just deserts receive
This expression refers to the deep end of a what you deserve, especially appropriate
swimming pool, where the diving board is punishment. 
located. In the USA the phrase has also
developed the meaning go mad , but in design
either sense the underlying idea is of ahave designs on aim to obtain something
sudden explosive loss of self-control. 
desired, especially in an underhand way. 
in deep water or waters in trouble or 2003 Economist Hardliners... think America
difficulty, informal has designs on its oil, and will act against Iran
once it has disposed of Saddam Hussein. 
In deep water is a biblical metaphor; see, for example, Psalm 69:14: let me be delivered despite
from them that hate me, and out of the deep despite yourself used to indicate that you did
waters. not intend to do the thing mentioned. 
1995 Ginu Kamani Junglee Girl Sahil chuckled,
jump or be thrown in at the deep end face despite himself. 
a difficult problem or undertaking with
little experience of it. informa informal
a or the deuce of a — something very bad
deliver or difficult of its kind. 
deliver the goods provide something 1933 John Galsworthy The End of the Chapter It
promised or expected, informal seems there a deuce of a fuss in the Bolivian
papers. delusion the deuce to pay trouble to be expected. 
delusions of grandeur a false impression of like the deuce very fast. 
your own importance. Deuce was first used in 17th-century
This expression is the equivalent of the English in various exclamatory expressions in ;
French phrase folie de grandeur, which came which it was equated with bad luck or
into English in the late 19th century and is still mischief, because in dice-playing two =
used today. deuce is the lowest and most unlucky throw,
From this there soon developed the sense of ;
deuce as the devil i. bad luck or mischief !
demon personified. Deuce as a euphemism for the
like a demon: see like the devil at DEVIL. devil occurs in a number of expressions,
including those above. depth
hidden depths admirable but previously
unnoticed qualities. device
leave someone to their own devices leave
out of your depth unable to cope due to lack someone to do as they wish without
of ability or knowledge. supervision. 
Literally, if you are out of your depth you Device in the sense of inclination or
are in water too deep to stand in. fancy now only occurs in the plural, and is
found only in this expression or in the phrase
devices and desires, as quoted from the
derry General Confession in the Book of Common
have a derry on someone be prejudiced Prayer. 
against someone. Australian & New Zealand
This expression refers to the traditiona evil
song refrain derry down, and was a late
between the devil and the deep blue sea
19th-century adaptation of have a down onsee DOWN. 
caught in a dilemma; trapped between two
equally dangerous alternatives. 
77 dicky bird
devil-may-care cheerfully or defiantly This phrase stems from the superstition
reckless. thatthe devil will manifest himself if his name is spoken. a or the devil of a — something very large
or bad of its kind, informal sup or dine with the devil have dealings
1919 Katherine Mansfield letter We had
with a cunning or malevolent person. 
the devil of a great storm last night, lasting for
hours, thunder, lightning, rain & had The proverb he who sups with the devil
appalling nightmares! should have a long spoon is used especially to the devil in the detail the details of a urge someone dealing with a person of this
type to take care. 
matter are its most tricky or problematicaspect. 
the devil own — a very difficult or great —. dialogue
informa ialogue of the deaf a discussion in which
1991 Mavis Nicholson Martha Jane b Me It was each party is unresponsive to what the
the devil own job to get her to give me some others say. 
money for savings. Tne French equivalent dialogue des
the devil to pay serious trouble to be sourds is also sometimes used in English. 
expected. 
This expression refers to the bargain diamond
formerly supposed to be made between diamond cut diamond a situation in which a
magicians and the devil, the former receiving !
sharp-witted or cunning person meets
extraordinary powers or wealth in return for their match. Britishtheir souls. 1863 Charles Reade Hard Cash He felt... sure
give the devil his due if someone or his employer would outwit him if he could;
something generally considered bad or and resolved it should be diamond cut
diamond. undeserving has any redeeming features
these should be acknowledged, proverb rough diamond: see ROUGH. 
like the devil or a demon with great speed diceor energy. 
dice with death take serious risks. 
play devil advocate take a side in an
argument that is the opposite of what you Dice with is used here in the general sense
really want or think. of play a game of chance with. In the mid
20th century dice with death was a
A translation of the Latin phrase ournalistic cliché used to convey the risks
advocatus diaboli, devil advocate is the taken by racing drivers; the expression seems
popular name for the official in the Roman for some time to have been especially
Catholic Church who puts the case against a connected with motoring, although it is now
candidate for canonization or beatification; used of other risky activities. It gave rise to the
he is more properly known as promotor use of dicing as a slang word among drivers
fidei promoter of the faith. for driving in a race , and it can be
compared with dicey meaning dangerous ,
1994 Jude Deveraux The Invitation She had a word which originated in 1950s air-force
played devil advocate with herself a slang. thousand times. 
play the devil or Old Harry with damage or load the dice against: see LOAD. 
affect greatly. no dice used to refuse a request or indicate
that there is no chance of success. North
Old Harry has been a nickname for the American informal
devil in northern England since the 18th 1990 Paul Auster The Music of Chance Sorry kid. 
century. No dice. You can talk yourself blue in the face,but not going. 
raise the devil make a noisy disturbance. 
informaldicky bird
sell your soul to the devil: see SELL. not a dicky bird not a word; nothing at all. 
speak or talk of the devil said when a informal
person appears just after beingDickybird is rhyming slang for word. mentioned. 
dictionary 78
1988 Glenn Patterson Burning Your Own historianSuetonius:yactaaeaesto letthedie Sammy put his ear to where he thought its be cast. 
heart ought to be: not a dickybird. die like flies: see FLY. 
dictionary die on the vine be unsuccessful at an early
have swallowed a dictionary use long and stage. Compare with wither on the vine
obscure words when speaking, informal at WITHER. 
dido die on your feet come to a sudden or
cut didoes perform mischievous tricks or premature end. informal
deeds. North American informa ie with your boots on die while actively
die occupied. 
die a death: see DEATH. : Die with your boots on was apparently
first used in the late 19th century of the deaths :
die hard disappear or change very slowly. of cowboys and others in the American West who were killed in gun battles or hanged. 
This expression seems to have been used first of criminals who died resisting to the last
never say die used to encourage someone
on the Tyburn gallows in London. At the
battle of Albuera in 1811, during the not to give up hope in a difficult situation. 
Peninsular War, William Inglis, commander straight as a die absolutely straight. 
of the British 57th Regiment of Foot, 0 entirely open and honest. 
exhorted his men to die hard ; they acted
0 1 2 0 Blackwood Magazine The... Ganges
with such heroism that the regiment earned ;
Canal... runs straight as a die between itsthe nickname Die-hards. The name waswooded banks. 
attached later in the century to various
groupings in British politics who were to die for extremely good or desirable. 
determinedly opposed to change. The informal
word diehard is still often used of someone 1990 Los Angeles Farther down the street is
who is stubbornly conservative or Tutti  , an Italian deli-restaurant that serves
reactionary. up... hazelnut torte to die for. 
die in your bed suffer a peacefu eath fromnatural causes. differ
agree to differ: see AGREE. 
die in harness die before retirement. 
This expression is drawing a comparison different
between a person at work and a horse in different strokes for different folks
harness drawing a plough or cart. different things please or are effective with
1992 Harper Magazine Don overly concern different people, proverb
yourself with the union pension fund. This chiefly US expression was used as a
Musicians mostly die in harness. 1 slogan in the early 1970s in a Texan drug
die in the last ditch die desperately ! abuse project. 
defending something; die fighting to thelast extremity. dig
This expression comes from a remark dig the dirt or dig up dirt discover and
attributed to King William III 1650-1702. revea amaging information about
Asked whether he did not see that his country ;someone, informal
was lost, he is said to have responded: There is one way never to see it lost, and that is to Dirt is commonly used as a metaphor for ;
die in the last ditch. Last-ditch is often used as unsavoury gossip or scandal, as in, for
an adjective meaning desperately resisting example, dish the dirt see DISH. 
to the end. 
dig in your heels resist stubbornly; refuse to
the die is cast an event has happened or a give in. 
decision has been taken that cannot be
changed. The image here is of a horse or other
animal obstinately refusing to be led or
O This expression has its origins in Julius ridden forwards. Dig in your heels is the
Caesar remark as he was about to cross commonest form, but dig in your toes and
the Rubicon, as reported by the Roman dig in your feet are also found. 
79 dip
dig yourself into a hole or dig a hole for less than the amount of money or energy
yourself get yourself into an awkward or invested. 
restrictive situation. This expression originated in the early
dig your own grave do something foolish 19th century with reference to the profits
which causes you to fail or leads to your from agriculture. 
downfall. 
1995 Colin Bateman Divorcing Jack Then dine
thought about Patricia again and how much dine out on regularly entertain friends with
was missing her and how dug my own a humorous story or interesting piece of
grave over the phone. information. 
dig a pit for try to trap. 1998 Fannie Flagg Welcome to the World, Baby
This is a common biblical metaphor: for Girl! didn have a great childhood but not
example, in Jeremiah 18:20 we find they going to dine out on it. hate whiners. 
have digged a pit for my soul. dinkumfair dinkum Qgenuine or true, of
dignity behaviour acceptable. Australian & New Zealand
beneath your dignity of too little informal
importance or value for you to do it. As a noun dinkum, recorded from the late The Latin equivalent is infra dignitatem, 19th century, was an English dialect word
and the humorous abbreviation of this, infra meaning hard work, honest toil ; it now
dig, is sometimes used in informal contexts. mainly features as an adjective in various
Australian and New Zealand expressions. 
stand on your dignity insist on being treatedwith due respect. dinner
dim done like a dinner utterly defeated ortake a dim view of: see VIEW. 
outwitted. Australian & Canadian informal
1978 C. Green The Sun Is Up had old Splinters
Maloney thefishinginspector knocking on me
dime door wanting to see me licence. Of course was
a dime a dozen very common and of no done like a dinner. particular value. US informal
more — than someone has had hot dinners
A dime is a small US coin worth ten cents someone experience of a specified
which occurs in various US expressions as a activity or phenomenon is vastly greater
metaphor for cheapness or smallness. than someone else  . British informal
1998 Odds On Triplett has been second more
1998 New Scientist Of course, medical times than he had hot dinners, and there
breakthroughs are not a dime a dozen. 
must be a question about his bottle, but he has
drop the dime on: see DROP. two qualities that will stand him in good stead
get off the dime be decisive and show at the Olympic Club. 
initiative. US informal
2001 U. S. News b World Report Congress dinner pail
must get off the dime and redeem the hand in your dinner pai ie. informal
commitments that President Bush made toA dinner pail was the bucket in which aNew York City. 
workman formerly carried his dinner;
on a dime of a manoeuvre that can be : compare with kick the bucket at KICK. 
performed by a moving vehicle or person
within a small area or short distance, dint
quickly or instantly. US informal
by dint of by means of. 
The British equivalent to sense 1 is on a
Dint in the sense of blow or stroke is
sixpence see SIXPENCE. 
now archaic, and in the sense of application of force survives only in this phrase. 
diminishingthe law of diminishing returns used to dip
refer to the point at which the level of dip your pen in gall write unpleasantly or
profits or benefits to be gained is reduced to spitefully. 
dirt 80
Gall is another word for bile, the bitter talk dirty speak about sex a a y
secretion of the liver; it is used in many places considered to be coarse or obscene. 
in the Bible as a metaphor for bitterness or informal
affliction. See also wormwood and gall at .... ,.... 
w a your dirty linen in public: see N. : WORMWOOD. r
dip your toe into something begin to do or Disappearing
d atest something cautiously. disappearing act go away without being
seen to go, especially when someone is
The image here is of putting your toe looking for you. 
briefly into water in order to check the
temperature. The suggestion here is that the person has vanished as completely and inexplicably as
things vanish in a magician act. 
dirt
do someone dirt harm someone maliciously. informal
disaster
1939 Nathaniel West The Day of the locust be a recipe for disaster be almost certain to
remember those who do me dirt and those have unfortunate consequences. 
who do me favors. drag g the dirt: see A G. 
discretiondiscretion is the better part of valour it seat dirt: see A T. 
better to avoid a dangerous situation than
treat someone like dirt treat someone to confront it. proverb
contemptuously or unfairly. 
1996 Just Seventeen He was only nice to me in dish
private—as soon as he was around other dish the dirt reveal or spread scandalous
people he treat me like dirt. information or gossip, informal
dirty 1997 New Scientist We love revisionist
biographies that dish the dirt on our icons. 
the dirty end of the stick the difficult or
unpleasant part of a task or situation. dishwater
informa ull as dishwater: see L. 
2000 Sunday Times Johannesburg still feel a bit
sorry for Hugh, he always seems to get the distancedirty end of the stick. 
go the distance complete a difficult task or
dirty work at the crossroads illicit or
endure an ordeal. underhand dealing, humorous
Go the distance is a metaphor from
This expression is recorded from the early boxing that means, when used of a boxer,
20th century and may reflect the fact that complete a fight without being knocked out :
crossroads, the traditional burial site for or, when used of a boxing match, last the
people who had committed suicide, were scheduled length. In the USA there is an
once viewed as sinister places. additional baseball-related sense: pitch for
the entire length of an inning. 
1914 P. G. Wodehouse The Man Upstairs A
conviction began to steal over him that some 1998 Times Everyone wants to see an
game was afoot which he did not understand, amateur who can go the distance, another
that—in a word—there was dirty work at the spectator said. Kuchar has certainly gone the
crossroads. distance. 
do the dirty on cheat or betray within spitting distance within a very short
someone. British informa istance. 
get your hands dirty or dirty your hands 1991 Time His reputation as a hard-boiled
do manual, menial, or other hard work. novelist is within spitting distance of
@ become directly involved in dishonest or Hammett and Chandler  . 
dishonorable activity, informal within striking distance near enough to hit
01998 Spectator Unlike its sister churches in or achieve. 
the West, the Catholic Church in the
Philippines is not afraid to get its hands dirty. ditchwater
play dirty act in a dishonest or unfair way. dull as ditchwater: see l as a at
informa ULL. 81 dog1992 Daily Star It do or die for Britain  
dive fearless Rugby League lads Down Under as
take a dive Qof a boxer or footballer they prepare to face the Aussies in the Third
pretend to fall so as to deceive an opponent and deciding Test. 
or referee of prices, hopes, fortunes, do someone proud: see PROUD. 
etc. fall suddenly and significantly, informal
01998 New Scientist When the DOJ do something to death: see DEATH. 
announced its action, Microsoft stock price do the trick: see TRICK. 
took a dive, knocking $10 billion off the firm dos and don ts rules of behaviour. 
market value. 1999 Alumnus Volunteers are prepared well
on... cultura os and don ts before they leavedivide for the field to serve. 
divide and rule or conquer the policy ofmaintaining supremacy over your
opponents by encouraging dissentdock
between them, thereby preventing them in dock of a ship moored in a dock. of a
from uniting against you. person not fully fit and out of action. British
informal of a vehicle in a garage for
This is a maxim associated with a number repairs. 
of rulers, and is found in Latin as divide et impera and in German as entzwei undin the dock under investigation or scrutiny
gebiete. Since the early 17th century, English for suspected wrongdoing or harm caused. 
writers have often wrongly attributed it to Britishthe Italian political philosopher Niccolo
Machiavelli 1469-1527. In a court of law, the dock is the enclosure where the defendant stands during a trial. 
1995 Times For once, Britain was not in the
divided dock as others took the heat. 
divided against itself of a group which
should be a unified whole split by factiona octor
interests. be just what the doctor ordered be very
This expression originates in Jesus words beneficial or desirable under the
in Matthew 12:25: every city or house divided circumstances, informal
against itself shall not stand. 1948 Gore Vidal The City and the Pillar The
waiter brought her a drink. Just what the
Dixie doctor ordered, she said, smiling at him. 
whistle Dixie engage in unrealistic fantasies; go for the doctor make an all-out effort. 
Australian informalwaste your time. USO Dxeisan informal nameforthe Southern dodge
states of the USA. The marching song Dixie dodge the column shirk your duty; avoid
1859 was popular with Confederate
work. British informal soldiers in the American Civil War. 
Column is a military term which refers to 2001 New York Times These guys are just the usual formation of troops for marching. 
whistling Dixie... They re ignoring the basic
issues that everyone been pointing out to
them for a decade. dododead as a dodo: see DEAD. do
do a — behave in a manner characteristic of a dog
specified person or thing, informal
2001 Times One reporter even got the dog-and-pony show an elaborate display or
brigadier in charge to do a Blair and come performance designed to attract people  
over all emotional while discussing the cull. attention. North American informal
1998 Spectator Happy as always am to help
do your head or nut in make you feel the Bank of England, have... supplied the
angry, worried, or agitated. British informal script for its euro dog and pony show. 
do the honours: see HONOUR. dog eat dog a situation of fierce competition
do or die persist in the face of great danger, in which people are willing to harm each
even if death is the result. other in order to succeed. 
dog 82
This expression makes reference to the lose a bad reputation, even if it is
proverb dog does not eat dog, which dates unjustified. 
back to the mid 16th century in English and
before that to Latin canis caninam non est a   a shortened version of the proverb dog does not eat dog flesh. give a dog a bad name and hang him, which was known from the early 18th century. 
1998 Rebecca Ray A Certain Age It dog eat dog,
it every man for himself... Right from the go to the dogs deteriorate shockingly,
start, fighting amongst ourselves for the few especially in behaviour or morals, informal
decent wages left. This idiom derives from the fact that
dog in the manger a person inclined to
attending greyhound races was once thought ;
prevent others from having or using likely to expose a person to mora anger and things that they do not want or need the risk of incurring great financial loss. themselves. 
1997 Daily Telegraph If you read the English
This expression comes from the fable of media or watch the cretinosities of television,
thedogthatlayinamangertopreventtheox you would think that the country is going to
and horse from eating the hay. the dogs. 
the hair of the dog: see HAIR. 
the dog bollocks the best person or thing of
its kind. British vulgar slang help a lame dog over a stile come to the aid
a dog dinner or breakfast a poor piece of of a person in need. 
work; a mess. British informal in a dog age in a very long time. North
The image is of a dog meal of jumbled- American informal
up scraps. keep a dog and bark yourself pay someone
to work for you and then do the work
2000 Independent He was rightly sacked yourself. 
because he had made such a dog dinner of an 1991 Purchasing and Supply Management He
important job. does not solve the subcontractor technical
a dog life an unhappy existence full of problems, keeping a dog and barking
problems or unfair treatment. himself. 
1987 Fannie Flagg Fried Green Tomatoes at the let the dog see the rabbit let someone get on
Whistle Stop Cafe The judge daughter had just with work they are ready and waiting to do. 
died a couple of weeks ago, old before her time informal
and living a dog life on the outskirts of town. 
This phrase comes from greyhound
dog tired extremely tired; utterly worn out. 
racing, where the dogs chase a mechanical
informalrabbit around a track. The image here, and in the variant dog
weary, is of a dog exhausted after a long let sleeping dogs lie: see SLEEPING. 
chase or hunt. like a dog with two tails showing great
pleasure; delighted. 
dogs of war the havoc accompanying
military conflict, literary mercenary The image here isof a dog wagging itstail soldiers. as an expression of happiness. 
This phrase is from Shakespeare Julius not a dog chance no chance at all. 
Caesar, let slip the dogs of war. The image is jput on the dog behave in a pretentious or
of hunting dogs being loosed from their
leashes to pursue their prey. 
ostentatious way. North American informal
01998 Times The good guys... may have Do9 a late 19th-century US slang for
style or a flashy display. 
broken the rules by employing dogs of war. 
dressed up like a dog dinner wearing 1962 Anthony Gilbert No Dust in the Attic
ridiculously smart or ostentatious clothes. Matron put on a lot of dog about the hospital  
British informal responsibility. 
every dog has his or its day everyone will rain cats and dogs: see RAIN. 
have good luck or success at some point in sick as a dog: see SICK. 
their lives, proverb throw someone to the dogs discard some give a dog a bad name it is very difficult to one as worthless. 
83 door
you can teach an old dog new tricks you The nonsense word doodah is the refrain cannot make people change their ways. of the song Camptown Races , originally
proverb sung by slaves on American plantations. 
doggo doom
lie doggo remain motionless or quiet. British
doom and gloom a general feeling of
Lie doggo is of uncertain origin, but pessimism or despondency. 
probably arose from a dog habit of lying
This expression, sometimes found as
motionless or apparently asleep butgloom and doom, was particularly pertinent
nonetheless alert. to fears about a nuclear holocaust during the
cold war period of the 1950s and 1960s. It
doghouse became a catchphrase in the 1968 filmFinian Rainbow. 
in the doghouse or dogbox in disgrace ordisfavour, informal
1963 Pamela Hansford Johnson Night & Silence doomsday
He been getting bad grades, he was in the til oomsday for ever. 
dog-house as it was. 
Doomsday means literally judgementdollar day , the Last Judgement of Christiantradition. 
be dollars to doughnuts that be a certainty
that. North American informal1936 James Curtis The Gilt Kid If he were seen it door
was dollars to doughnuts that he would be as one door closes, another opens you
arrested. shouldn be discouraged by failure, as
you can bet your bottom dollar: see you can other opportunities will soon present
bet your boots at BET. themselves, proverb
done at death door: see DEATH. close or shut the door on or to exclude
a done deal a plan or project that has been
finalized or accomplished. the opportunity for; refuse to consider. 
1991 New Yorker The French are still 1999 South China Morning Post Fergie did not
overreacting to German unification, even close the door on the couple reconciling some
though it is a done deal. day. 
done for in a situation so bad that it is door to door Qof a journey from start to
impossible to get out of it. informal finish. visiting all the houses in an area to
1993 Catholic Herald Don you realise that sell or publicize something. 
without that contract we re done for? lay something at someone door regard or
done in extremely tired, informal name someone as responsible for
1999 Chris Dolan Ascension Day Morag was too something. 
upset and Paris was too done in to try and workThis phrase may have arisen from the
out what was happening. 
practice of leaving an illegitimate baby on
the doorstep of the man who was identified donkey as its father. 
for donkey years for a very long time. informal leave the door open for ensure that
there is still an opportunity forFor donkey years is a pun referring to the length of a donkey ears and playing on asomething. 
former pronunciation of years as ears. open the door to create an opportunity
for. 1998 Ardal Hanlon The Talk of the Town 1995 Kindred Spirit By recreating the space
He ll be no loss, that for sure. Sure his own in which you live or work, Feng Shui
family haven spoken to him for donkey can open the door to abundance, wellbeing
years. and a Renewed Sense of Purpose!
doodah show someone the door dismiss
all of a doodah very agitated or excited. someone unceremoniously from your
informal presence. 
doornail 84
a toe in the door: see TOE. double-edged
doornail a double-edged sword or weapon a course
of action or situation having both positive
dead as a doornail: see DEAD. 
and negative effects. doorstep 2000 Investor A rising pound is a double-edged
sword when investing overseas. 
on your or the doorstep very near; close athand. doubting
1998 New Scientist The solution to Underbill  
problem was on his doorstep. a doubting Thomas a person who refuses
to believe something without having
dose incontrovertible proof; a sceptic. 
a dose of your own medicine: see In the Bible, the apostle Thomas said that MEDICINE. he would not believe that Christ had risen
from the dead until he had seen and touched in smal oses experienced or engaged in a
his wounds John 20:24-9. 
little at a time. 
1994 American Spectator In smal oses,
ironica etachment is as necessary for getting dovecote
along in life as... any of the other human
flutter the dovecotes: see FLUTTER. 
qualities. 
like a dose of salts very fast and efficiently. down
British informal
down and dirty unprincipled; unpleasant. 
The salts referred to in this expression are energetically earthy, direct, or sexually
laxatives. explicit. North American informal
1991 Peter Carey The Tax Inspector She going down and out beaten in the struggle of life;
to go through your old man like a dose of salts. completely without resources or means of
livelihood. dot The phrase down and out comes from
dot the and cross the ensure that all boxing, and refers to a boxer who is knocked details are correct, informal out by a blow. Since the early 20th century
the noun down-and-out has been used to
on the dot exactly on time, informa escribe a person without money, a job, or a The dot referred to is that appearing on a place to live. 
clock face to mark the hour. down in the mouth of a person or
1998 Oldie The Conditions of Sale state that their expression unhappy or dejected. 
the buyer has to pay the auctioneer on the dot. informal
the year dot a very long time ago. British
informa own on your luck experiencing a period of
1998 Spectator From the year dot there has bad luck, informal
been an uneasy relationship between press down the road in the future; later on. informal,
and police. chiefly North American
An Australian variant of this phrase is
double ! down the track. at or on the double at running speed; very
fast. down the tube or tubes lost or wasted. informal
This modern generalized sense has 2001 High Country News ve already lost my
developed from the mid 19th-century alfalfa crop; that about $20,000 down the
military useof couoe pace to mean twice the jtubes. 
number of steps per minute of slow pace. down to the ground completely; totally. 
double or nothing a gamble to decide informal
whether a loss or debt should be doubled or 1997 Daily Mail Sly better sense of comic
cancelled. timing suits the tongue-in-cheek script down
to the ground. A British variant of double or nothing is
down tools stop work, typically as a form of
double or quits. industrial action. British informal85 drawing
have or put someone or something down drain
as judge someone or something to be adown the drain totally wasted or spoilt. 
particular type or class of person or thing. 
1914 M. A. Von Arnim The Pastor Wife The informal
other excursionists were all in pairs; they 1930 W. Somerset Maugham The Breadwinner
thought Ingeborg was too, and put her down All his savings are gone down the drain. 
at first as the German gentleman wifebecause he did not speak to her. drama
make a drama out of exaggerate the
have a or be down on disapprove of; feel
importance of a minor problem or
hostile or antagonistic towards, informal
incident, informaldowngrade
on the downgrade in decline. North American draught
feel the draught experience an adverse
Downgrade was originally used literally
of a downward slope. change in your financial circumstances. informal
1953 William Burroughs Letter As a matter of 1992 Daily Express Redland... felt the draught
fact the whole region is on the downgrade. of George Wimpey interim profits slide. 
The rubber business is shot, the cocoa is eat up
with broom rot. drawdownhil raw a bead on: see BEAD. 
be downhill all the way Qbe easy in draw a blank: see BLANK. 
comparison with what came before, draw someone fire attract hostility or
become worse or less successful. criticism away from a more important
go downhill become worse; deteriorate. target. 
downwardly draw the or a line at set a limit of what you
are willing to do or accept, beyond which
downwardly mobile: see MOBILE. you will not go. 
dozen 1995 Kate Atkinson Behind the Scenes at the
a baker dozen: see BAKER. Museum She even manages to persuade
Gillian not to cheat... although Gillian
talk nineteen to the dozen: see TALK. draws the line at not screaming when she
loses. drag draw the short straw: see STRAW. 
drag your feet or heels of a person or
organization be deliberately slow or draw stumps cease doing something. 
reluctant to act. In the game of cricket, the stumps are
1994 Nature Conservancy We can afford to taken out of the ground at the close of play, drag our feet until a species is at the brink of
extinction. the luck of the draw: see LUCK. 
drag someone or something through the quick on the draw: see QUICK. 
dirt or mud make damaging allegations
about someone or something. drawer
1998 Economist The deputy prime bottom drawer the collection of linen,
minister... is having his name dragged
clothes, and household items assembled
through the mud. 
by a woman in preparation for herdragon marriage. 
chase the dragon: see CHASE. bottom drawer was the traditional
sow or plant dragon teeth take action place for storing for such articles. The US
that is intended to prevent trouble, but equivalent is hope chest. 
which actually brings it about. 
In Greek legend, Cadmus killed a dragon drawing
and sowed its teeth, which sprang up as back to the drawing board: see BACK. 
armed men; these men then killed one on the drawing board of an idea, scheme, or
another, leaving just five survivors who proposal under consideration; not yet put
became the ancestors of the Thebans. into practice. 
dream 86O To get something off the drawing board 
is to put something into action or to realizedrivingthe first stages of a project. 
what someone is driving at the point thatsomeone is attempting to make. 
1986 Robert Sproat Stunning the Punters Martin
dream is always saying things where can see what
beyond your wildest dreams bigger, better, he driving at. 
or to a greater extent than it would bereasonable to expect or hope for. drop
dream in colour or Technicolour be wildly at the drop of a hat without delay or good
unrealistic. reason, informal
1991 Independent These days Soviet visas are
in your dreams used to assert that somethingissued at the drop of a hat. 
much desired is not likely ever to happen. 
2002 New Yorker Before falling asleep, try to drop your aitches fail to pronounce the 
imagine myself as... a savvy entrepreneur sound, especially at the beginning of
with her own catering business. In your words. 
dreams, as they say. Britain, dropping your aitches is
like a dream very well or successfully, informal considered by some to be a sign of a lack of
1996 Good Food The spring lamb is stuffed education or of inferior social class. 
... laced with garlic and herbs, and carves
like a dream. 1903 George Bernard Shaw Man & Superman
This man takes more trouble to drop his
never in your wildest dreams used to aitches than ever his father did to pick
emphasize that something is beyond the them up. scope of your imagination. 
drop the ball make a mistake; mishandle1996 Daily Star Never in his wildest dreams did
things. North American informal
he think the cheers were to welcome the
opening goal of a match. drop a brick make an indiscreet or
embarrassing remark. British informal
dressed drop your bundle become very nervous or
dressed to kill wearing attractive and upset; go to pieces. Australian
flamboyant clothes in order to make a
drop a clanger make an embarrassing orstriking impression. 
foolish mistake. British informal
Dropping something that makes adrink loud clang attracts attention; this mid
drink like a fish drink excessive amounts of 20th-century expression is used especially
alcohol, especially habitually. in the context of a very embarrrassing or
tactless act or remark made in a social
drink someone under the table consume situation. more alcohol than your drinking
companion without becoming as drunk. 1998 Spectator Yet he never escaped from
informal his own nagging suspicion that he had
somehow overachieved... and that he
was likely to drop a huge clanger at any
drive moment. 
drive a coach and horses through: see COACH. drop dead die suddenly and unexpectedly,
drive something home: see HOME. used as an expression of intense scorn or
let drive attack with blows, missiles, or dislike, informal
criticism. 
This idiom is the source of the adjective
1926 Travel let drive for the point of his
drop-dead, which is used to emphasize how
chin, and he went down and out for a full attractive someone or something is, as in
count. drop-dead gorgeous. driver drop the or a dime on inform on someone
in the driver or driving seat in charge of a to the police. US informal
situation. 1990 Scott Turow The Burden of Proof Dixon
1998 Times The deal would propel the says he thought it over, the best course
no-nonsense Lancastrian into the driving seat for him is just to drop the dime on John. 
at the UK biggest generator. drop your guard: see GUARD. 
87 duck
drop a hint or drop hints let fall a hint or dry
hints, as if casually or unconsciously. dry be unsuccessful. North American
drop someone or something like a hot 1 8 8 James Trefil The Dark Side of the Universe
Attempts to see this decay with extremely
potato: see HOT. 
sensitive experiments have so far come up dry. 
drop someone a line send someone a note or
dry as dust extremely dry. extremely
letter in a casual manner. dull. 
a drop in the ocean or in a bucket a very
Sense 2 is represented in the fictitious
small amount compared with what is
character of the antiquarian Dr Jonasneeded or expected. ! Dryasdust, to whom Sir Walter Scott
1995 Ian Rankin Let It Bleed A few million was a ! addressed the prefatory epistle of Ivanhoe
drop in the ocean, hardly a ripple. ! and some other novels. 
drop names: see NAME. 
drop the pilot: see PILOT. there wasn a dry eye in the house
drop your trousers deliberately let your everyone in the audience of a film, play,
trousers fal own, especially in a public speech, etc. was moved to tears. 
place. 
fit or ready to drop worn out; exhausted. duck
break your duck score the first run of your
have the drop on have the advantage over. Informal innings. Cricket make your first score or
achieve a particular feat for the first time. Have the drop on was originally a mid British
19th-century US expression used literally
duck and dive use your ingenuity to deal
to mean that you have the opportunity to
shoot before your opponent can use their with or evade a situation. 
weapon. 1998 New Scientist You don last for over 100
million years without some capacity to duck
2000 Clay Shooting He always seems to have and dive. 
the drop on me by one bird no matter how
hard try. fine weather for ducks: see WEATHER. 
get or have your ducks in a row get or have
drown your facts straight; get or have everything
drown your sorrows forget your problems organized. North American informal
by getting drunk. 1996 Brew Your Own You really want tohave all your ducks in a row before the
drowned meeting. 
like a drowned rat extremely wet and like a dying duck in a thunderstorm
bedraggled. having a dejected or hopeless expression. 
informaldrugThe miserable demeanour of ducks
a drug on the market an unsaleable or during thunder has been proverbial since the valueless commodity. late 18th century. 
Drug in the sense f a commodity for 1 3 3 Agatha Christie Lord Edgware Dies You did
which there is no demand is recorded from look for all the world like a dying duck in a
the mid 17th century, but it is not clear from thunderstorm. 
the word history whether it is the same
word as the medicinal substance. lame duck a person or thing that is powerless
or in need of help, informal
1998 Spectator Merchant banks are a drug on
the market these days. the mid 18th century, lame duck was
used in a stock-market context, with
drum reference to a person or company that could not fulfil their financial obligations. Later,
beat or bang the drum for or of be. from the mid 19th century, it was used
ostentatiously in support of. specifically with reference to US politicians in the final period of office, after the election of march to a different drum: see MARCH. : their successor. 
drunk 1998 Spectator At some point in his second and
drunk as a lord or skunk extremely drunk. final term, every president becomes a lame
duckling 88
duck: as the man himself matters less, so does The image here is of making a knife  
the office. edge blunt. take to something like a duck to water take
to something very readily. 1960 C. Day Lewis Buried Day had taken to dummy
vice like a duck to water, but it ran off me like sell someone a dummy chiefly in rugby or
water from a duck back. soccer deceive an opponent by feigning apass or kick. 
like water off a duck back a remark orincident which has no apparent effect on a
person. dump
play ducks and drakes with trifle with; treat down in the dumps of a person depressed
frivolously. or unhappy, informal
In early 16th-century English dump hadThis expression comes from the game
the meaning a fit of depression , a sense now jof ducks and drakes, played by throwing
surviving only in this expression. 
a flat stone across the surface of water
in such a way as to make it skim and skipbefore it finally sinks. The game was
known by this name by the late 16thdumper
century, and it was already a metaphor for aninto the dumper into a bad or worse state or
idle or frivolous activity in the early 17th condition. North American informal
century. 1991 Tucson Weekly. Fife III peaked well
before his run for governor... and has been
sliding into the dumper ever since. duckling
an ugly duckling: see UGLY. dustdry as dust: see DRY. dudgeon
in high dudgeon in a state of deep dust and ashes used to convey a feeling of
resentment. great disappointment or disillusion about
something. The origin of dudgeon in the sense of ill humour is unknown, and it is almost always Oftenfoundinthefullerformturntocust found in this phrase. However, other and ashes in your mouth, the phrase is used in ;
adjectives are sometimes used instead of theBibleasametaphorforworthlessness,for
high, for example deep or great. example in Genesis 18:27 andtheBookof Job ;
30:19. It derives from the legend of the
1938 Zane Grey Raiders of the Spanish Peaks Sodom apple, or Dead Sea fruit, whose
Neale left in high dudgeon to take his case to attractive appearance tempted people, but
his court of appeal—his mother. which tasted only of dust and ashes when eaten. 
duff the dust settles things quieten down. 
up the duff pregnant. British informal 1998 New Scientist The dust is settling on the
1994 Daily Telegraph At 19, he was married chaos which ensued when the French sold
only because she was up the duff he explains 110,000 tickets to the World Cup football
gallantly. matches by phone. eat someone dust: see EAT. 
duke gather or collect dust remain unused. 
duke it out fight it out. North American informal
not see someone for dust find that a person
Dukes or dooks are fists , especially when has made a hasty departure. 
raised in a fighting position. The word comes 1978 Patricia Grace Mutuwhenua You didn see
from rhyming slang Duke of Yorks, forks this Maori for dust... Out the door, on the
i. fingers. bike, and away. raise or kick up a dust create a disturbance. 
dull British
dull as dishwater or ditch water extremelydull. dusted
dull the edge of make less sensitive, be done and dusted of a project be
interesting, or effective. completely finished or ready, informal
89 dykedusty Dutchman
a dusty answer a curt and unhelpful reply. a Dutchman used to express your
British disbelief or as a way of underlining an
emphatic assertion. British
The source of this expression is probably 1994 Ian Botham My Autobiography read
a passage in George Meredith Modern
somewhere that Warne said he had been
Love 1862: Ah, what a dusty answer gets
possessed by demons. Well, in that case m
the soul when hot for certainties in this our
life! a Dutchman. dutyDutch duty bound morally or legally obliged to do
Dutch courage bravery induced by drinking something. alcohol. dwaal 
The phrase Dutch courage stems from along-standing British belief that the Dutch
in a dwaal in a dreamy, dazed, or absent are extraordinarily heavy drinkers. minded state. South African
1985 Paul Slabolepszy Saturday Night at the
a Dutch uncle a kindly but authoritative Palace Yassas—Carstens!! Wake up, man. You
figure. in a rea waal tonight. 
Dutch here probably means no more than dyed
that the person described is not a genuine dyed in the wool of a person completely
blood relation. In the mid 19th century will talk to him like a Dutch uncle meaning will and permanently fixed in a particular
give him a lecture was noted as being an belief or opinion; inveterate. 
American expression. 
If yarn is dyed in the raw state, it produces 1999 Daily Telegraph She was the kindest of ! a more even and permanent colour. 
Dutch uncles, always prepared to listen toone troubles. dying
go Dutch share the cost of something to your dying day for the rest of your life. 
equally. 1967 George Mackay Brown A Calendar of
Love This one always was and ever will be to
An outing or entertainment paid
for in this way is a Dutch treat and sharing his dying day a garrulous long-winded old
the cost of a meal in a restaurant is eating
man. Dutch. dyke
1993 Vanity Fair He insists on buying his own put your finger in the dyke attempt to stem
tickets, going Dutch , as he puts it. the advance of something undesirable
in Dutch in trouble. US informal, dated which threatens to overwhelm you. informal
1939 Raymond Chandler The Big Sleep And for
that amount of money you re willing to get This expression stems from the story of a yourself in Dutch with half the law enforce- ! smal utch boy who saved his community
ment of this country? from flooding by placing his finger in a hole in a dyke. 
that beats the Dutch that is extraordinary orstartling. USEeset by the ears cause people to quarrel. 
eager
an eager beaver a person who is very someone ears are flapping someone is
enthusiastic about work, informal listening intently in order to overhear
something not intended for them. ear informal
be all ears be listening eagerly and turn a deaf ear: see A F. 
attentively, informal
up to your ears in very busy with or deeply
bring something down about your ears
bring something, especially misfortune, on involved in. informal
yourself. wet behind the ears immature or
dry behind the ears mature or inexperienced. 
experienced. someone ears are burning someone is
fall on deaf ears: see DEAF. subconsciously aware of being talked
have someone ear have access to and about, especially in their absence. 
influence with someone. The superstition that your ears tingle
1993 Olympian About 50 of the freshman when you are being talked about is recorded from the mid 16th century. Originally it
congressman constituents had his ear for
was the left ear only that was supposed to
more than two hours. do so. 
have something by the ears keep or obtain a
secure hold on. 
1949 Dylan Thomas Letter am tangled in early
hack-work. Depression has me by the ears. early bird a person who gets up, arrives, or
have something coming out of your ears acts before the usual or expected time. 
have a substantial or excessive amount of This expression comes from the saying the something, informal early bird catches the worm, meaning that
1997 Daily Express In terms of advice... Jill the person who takes the earliest
had suggestions coming out of her ears. opportunity to do something will gain an
advantage over others. have or keep an ear to the ground be well
informed about events and trends. early doors early on, especially in a game or
The idea behind this phrase is that by contest. British informal
putting your ear against the ground you
Apparently this expression arose withwould be able to hear approaching
reference to a period of admission to a music footsteps. 
hall ending some time before the start of the !
performance and giving a better choice of
in one ear and out the other heard but seating. 
disregarded or quickly forgotten. 
2003 Guardian Jeremy Vine, hosting Radio 2  
lend an ear: see LEND. 
music industry debate last night, got a dig in
listen with half an ear not give your full early doors about his hallowed predecessor on
attention to someone or something. the station. 
make a pig ear of: see PIG. it early days it is too soon to be sure how
make a silk purse out of a sow ear: a particular situation wil evelop. British
see SILK. informaltake an early bath Obe sent off in a game of
out on your ear dismissed or ejected
football or other sport. fail early on in a
ignominiously. informal
race or contest, informal
1997 Accountancy At the age of 47, he found
himself out on his ear, victim of Lord Hanson 0 1 9 2 Bowlers World Defending champion
policy of taking over companies... and Dave Phillips took an early bath losing all his
replacing senior management. three opening qualifying games. 91 easy
This expression was originally a mid 19th earn century American one, but it is now in general
earn your corn put in a lot of effort for your use. It was used around the year 1880 by Mark
wages. British informal Twain in the alternative form rolling off a log. 
earn your keep be worth the time, money, or
easy as pie very easy, informal
effort spent on you. 
P easa metaphor for something pleasant earner was originally late 19th-century US slang. 
a nice little earner a profitable activity or Compare with nice as pie and pie in the sky
business. British informal at PIE. 
1996 Independent Today children know a nice
little earner when they see one. easy come, easy go used to indicate that
something acquired without effort or
earth difficulty may be lost or spent casually and
without regret. come back down to earth or bring
someone back down to earth return Although recorded in this exact form only or make someone return suddenly to from the mid 19th century, easy come, easy
reality after a period of daydreaming or go had parallels in medieval French and in the euphoria. English sayings lightcome, light go mid 16th 2003 Guardian When you start to believe century and quickly come, quickly go mid
you re in with a shout, the big boys have a ! 19th century. 
nasty habit of bringing you down to earth with
a bump. easy does it approach a task carefully and
slowly, informal
cost or charge or pay the earth cost or
easy meat a person or animal overcome,
charge or pay a large amount of money. 
outwitted, or persuaded without difficulty. 
British informal informal
the earth moved or did the earth move for easy on the eye or ear pleasant to look at
you? you had or did you have? an orgasm. or listen to, informalhumorous
go to earth go into hiding. Easy on the eye originated in the late 19th century as a US expression describing a pretty Go to earth is used literally of a hunted woman, a context in which it is still often
animal hiding in a burrow or earth. Compare used. with go to ground at GROUND. 
go or be easy on be less a on
like nothing on earth very strange, informal or critical of someone, informal
1994 Mixmag Once in a blue moon, a record
tumbles down from the vinyl mountain that go easy on or with something be sparing
sounds like nothing on earth and completely or cautious in your use or consumption of
knocks you for six. something, informal
promise someone the earth: see have it easy be free from difficulties,
someone the at N. especially those normally associated
run someone or something to earth: see N. with a particular situation or activity. 
informal
earthly easy said by someone when offered a
not stand or have an earthly have no choice to indicate that they have no
chance at all. British informal particular preference, informal
of easy virtue of a woman promiscuous. 
easy : Easy in the sense of sexually compliant is an easy touch: see a soft at found in Shakespeare Cymbeline: Not a
whit, Your lady being so easy. come easy to present little difficulty to. 
1989 Tony Parker A Place Called Bird College take the easy way out extricate yourself
was a lot harder than High School, book work
from a difficult situation by choosing a
didn come easy to me there. 
course of action offering the least effort,
easy as ABC: see ABC. worry, or inconvenience, even though a
easy as falling off a log very easy, informal more honourable alternative exists. 
eat 92take it easy approach a task or activity This expression makes reference to the
gradually or carefully. relax. : regular movement of the tides, where ebb
means move away from the land and flow
eat move back towards it. eat someone alive of insects bite
someone many times. exploit someone echo
weakness ruthlessly, informal applaud or cheer someone to the echo
eat crow be humiliated by your defeats or applaud or cheer someone very
mistakes. North American informal enthusiastically. 
In the USA boiled crow has been a
metaphor for something extremelyeclipse
disagreeable since the late 19th century. in eclipse Qof a celestial object obscured
by another or the shadow of another. 
eat dirt suffer insults or humiliation, informal 0 losing or having lost significance,
power, or prominence. 
l the USA eat dirt also has the sense of0 1 9 1 Atlantic Within a decade of his
make a humiliating retraction or eat your
death... he was in eclipse: not written about,
words. undiscussed, forgotten in architectureschools. 
eat someone dust fall far behind someone
in a competitive situation. North Americaninformal
economical
1993 Fiddlehead She let everybody know she economical with the truth used
was moving on to True Love and they could euphemistically to describe a person or
eat her dust. statement that lies or deliberately
withholds information. eat your heart out suffer from excessive
longing, especially for someone or The phrase economy of truth was used
something unattainable, used to in the 18th century by the orator Edmund
indicate that you think someone will feel Burke 1729-97, while in the 19th century
great jealousy or regret about something. Mark Twain observed Truth is the most
01997 Christina Reid Clowns Wait ll you see valuable thing we have. Let us economize
t Following the Equator, 1897. Themy newfrock. Joan Collins eat your heart out. 
1 present phrase became current after its
eat someone out of house and home eat a use in the Spycatcher trial in the New South lot of someone else food, informal Wales Supreme Court: Robert Armstrong,
head of the British Civil Service, waseat humble pie: see HUMBLE. 
reported as saying of a letter: It contains
eat salt with: see SALT. a misleading impression, not a lie. It was
eat your words retract what you have said, being economical with the truth. 
especially when forced to do so. 2003 Observer He is ruthless in pursuit of
commercial goals, otherwise he would not
eating have been so economical with the truth two
have someone eating out of your hand months ago when he ruled out any notion of
have someone completely under your signing Beckham. 
control. 1987 Bernard MacLaverty The Great Profundo edge
One of my main difficulties is that not on the edge of your seat or chair very
good with an audience. There guys can come excited and giving your full attention to
out and have a crowd eating out of their hand something, informal
right away with a few jokes. set someone teeth on edge: see TEETH. 
what eating you or him or her? what is
worrying or annoying you or him or her? take the edge off something reduce the
informal intensity or effect of something,
especially something unpleasant or severe. 
ebbat a low ebb in an especially poor state. edgeways
ebb and flow a recurrent or rhythmical get a word in edgeways contribute to a
pattern of coming and going or decline and conversation with difficulty because the
regrowth. other speaker talks almost incessantly. 93 enchilada
effing up to your elbows in with your hands
plunged into something. deeply
effing and blinding using vulgar expletives;
involved in. informalswearing. j Effing and blinding here stand for the element
initial letters of taboo or vulgar slang words. in or out of your element in or out of your
accustomed or preferred environment,
where you feel confident and at ease, often
egg in performing a particular activity. 
a curate egg: see CURATE. don put all your eggs in one basket don t
risk everything on the success of oneelephant
venture, proverb see the elephant see the world; get
1996 Mail on Sunday Having too many eggs in experience of life. US
one basket—the British stock market—can be A elephant is used here to symbolize or a bad idea. Overseas investments can add typify something which is extremely
balance to an investment portfolio. remarkable or exotic. 
go suck an egg go away used as an
expression of anger or scorn. North American 1994 Fighting Firearms These men have all seen
informal the elephant and represent a typical cross section of the... staff in general. 
1993 Virginian Pilot & Ledger-Star Norfolk, Va. 
A place in the country where you can a white elephant: see WHITE. 
drop a line in the water from your back
yard and tell the rest of the world to go suck eleventh
an egg. at the eleventh hour at the latest possible
kill the goose that lays the golden egg: see moment. GOOSE. 
This expression originally referred to
lay an egg be completely unsuccessful; fail esus parable of the labourers hired right at badly. North American informal the end of the day to work in the vineyard
Matthew 20:1-16. sure as eggs is eggs: see SURE. 
with egg on your face appearing foolish or
ridiculous, informal Elysian
the Elysian Fields heaven, literary
eight Homer describes the Elysian Fields called behind the eight ball at a disadvantage; ! Elysium by Latin writers as the happy land in baffled. North American which the blessed spirits live in the afterlife. 
The black ball is numbered eight in a
variety of the game of pool known as eight- empty
ball pool. be running on empty have exhausted all
your resources or sustenance. 
one over the eight slightly drunk. British1998 New Scientist Bateson concluded that a
informal hunted deer may be running on empty for 90
The idea behind this idiom is that a minutes, but Harris argues that this period
drinker can reasonably be expected to will be just a few minutes. 
consume eight glasses of beer without empty nester a person whose children have
becoming drunk. The expression was
grown up and left home, informaloriginally armed forces slang from the early 20th century. empty vessels make most noise or sound
those with least wisdom or knowledge arealways the most talkative, proverbelbow
Vessel here refers to a hollow container,
give someone the elbow reject or dismiss
such as a bowl or cask, rather than a ship. 
someone, informalO The image is of nudging someone aside in a rough or contemptuous manner. enchiladathe big enchilada a person or thing of great
lift your elbow consume alcohol to excess. importance. North American informal
end 94
the whole enchilada the whole situation; the end of civilization as we know it the
everything. North American informal complete collapse of ordered society. 
1992 New York Times High-tech gadgetry is best 0 used to indicate that someone is being
viewed as the spice, but not the whole alarmist or is overreacting to a trivial
enchilada. inconvenience or blunder as if it were
An enchilada is an American Spanish
enormously significant and catastrophic. 
word for a tortilla served with chilli sauce and This expression is supposedly a cinematic a filling of meat or cheese. cliché, and was actually used in the film
Citizen Kane 1941: a project which wouldmean the end of civilization as we know it. 
end
all ends up completely, informal 1999 Select The giant, dreadlocked rapper  
1921 A. W. Myers Twenty Years of Lawn Tennis third album contains extensive deliberations
Barrett beat him all ends up in an early on the end of civilisation as we know it. 
round. the end of the road or line the point
at the end of the day when everything is beyond which progress or survival cannot
taken into consideration. British informal continue. 
1995 Jayne Miller Voxpop Today ve been end of story used to emphasize that there is
giving out leaflets. You don have to, but at the nothing more to add on the subject just
end of the day, it worth it. mentioned, informal
at the end of your tether having no patience, 1998 Times Parents are role models. Foot resources, or energy left to cope with ballers are picked for teams because they are
something. good at football. End of story. A North American variant of this
the end of the world a complete disaster. 
expression is at the end of your rope, and informal
in both cases the image is that of a grazing: This expression comes from the idea of
animal tethered on a rope that allows it athe termination of life on earth as the
certain range in which to move but which at iultimate catastrophe, but is often used with
full stretch prohibits further movement. 
the negative as a reassurance that a mistake or setback is not that important. 
at a loose end: see LOOSE. 
at your wit end: see WIT. 1994 Face If people are buying my records
the beginning of the end: see B G N G. 
that good, but if they re not it not the end of
the world. be on the receiving end: see G. 
get or have your end away have sex. British
be thrown in at the deep end: see DEEP. vulgar slang
burn the candle at both ends: see BURN. get the wrong end of the stick: see WRONG. 
the dirty end of the stick: see DIRTY. go off the deep end: see DEEP. 
end in tears have an unhappy or keep or hold your end up perform well
unpleasant outcome often used as a in a difficult or competitive situation. 
warning. British informal1992 lain Banks The Crow Road Well, let them
get married. The earlier the better; it would make both ends meet earn or have enough
end in tears. Let them rush into it, let them money to live on without getting into
repent at leisure. debt. 
end it all commit suicide. 1996 Amitav Ghosh The Calcutta Chromosome
Actually think she having trouble making
1993 Ray Shell iCED Quentin thought... he d
ump off the Brooklyn Bridge and make the ends meet, now that she retired. 
papers. At least he end it all in a blaze of make someone hair stand on end: see HAIR. 
media glory. a means to an end: see MEAN. 
the end justifies the means wrong or unfair never or not hear the end of something be
methods may be used if the overall goal is continually reminded of an unpleasant
good. topic or cause of annoyance. 
2002 Observer If it was Ireland or Wales we d
The Roman poet Ovid expresses this
support them, but not England. It a minority
concept in Heroides as exitus acta probat
nations thing. If England was to win, we d
meaning the outcome justifies the actions. never hear the end of it. 95 err
no end to a great extent; very much, informal envelope1984 James Kelman The Busconductor Hines
McCulloch gives him a go at the wheel at push the envelope or the edge of the
certain remote terminuses at specific times of envelope approach or extend the limits of
the late night and early morning and his what is possible, informal
confidence grows no end. This expression was originally aviation
no end of something a vast number or slang and related to graphs of aerodynamic
amount of something, informal performance on which the envelope is the
1996 Frank McCourt Angela Ashes If could boundary line representing an aircraft  
have Mrs Leibowitz and Minnie for mothers at capabilities. 
the same time have no end of soup and
mashed potatoes. 1993 Albuquerque These are extremely witty
and clever stories that consistently push the
the sharp end: see SHARP. envelope of TV comedy. 
the thin end of the wedge: see N. épater
to the bitter end: see BITTER. épater les bourgeois shock people who have
a—to end all —s something so impressive of attitudes or views regarded as conventional
its kind that nothing that follows will have or complacent. 
the same impact, informalThe French phrase is generally used in
The First World War was often referred to English, there being no exact English
as the war to end all wars, from the mistaken equivalent. Il faut épater le bourgeois one belief that it would make all subsequent wars : must astonish the bourgeois was a comment unnecessary. attributed to the French poet and criticCharles Baudelaire. 
1971 Bessie Head Maru It was a wedding to
end all weddings. 1995 Times Because it takes more than a urinal
to épater les bourgeois now, the real things that
are being hauled into galleries grow ever more
enemy provocative: turds, frozen foetuses and used
be your own worst enemy act contrary sanitary towels. 
to your own interests; be self-destructive. equal
1993 Richard Lowe & William Shaw Travellers first among equals the person or thing
We convinced ourselves that everything was having the highest status in a group. 
against us but the truth was we were probably
our own worst enemies. Thisexpression is a translation of the Latin phrase primus inter pares, which is also used public enemy number one: see PUBLIC. in English. 
Englishman other or all things being equal providedthat other factors or circumstances remain
an Englishman home is his castle an the same. 
English person home is a place where 1996 D. Hirsch Jr. Schools We Need Other
they may do as they please and from which things being equal, students from good-home
they may exclude anyone they choose. schools will always have an educational
British proverb advantage over studentsfromless-good-home
schools. enough err
enough is as good as a feast moderation is err on the right side act so that the most
more satisfying than excess, proverb likely mistake to be made is the least
enough is enough no more will be harmful one. 
tolerated. err on the side of act with a specified bias
1997 Earthmatters Unless we say enough is towards something. 
enough and start to take habitat protection 1999 Nature Der Sundefall message may err
seriously, the future of the world wildlife is on the side of alarmism, but it certainly is a
in jeopardy. good read. 
enough said there is no need to say more; all to err is human, to forgive divine it is human
is understood. nature to make mistakes yourself while
enough to make a cat laugh: see CAT. finding it hard to forgive others, proverb
escutcheon 96would strain the capacity of every last brain escutcheon cell to bursting point until he had solved it. 
a blot on your escutcheon: see BLOT. 
every man for himself everyone must take
essence care of themselves and their own interests
and safety. of the essence critically important. 
1990 Louis de Bernières The War of Don This expression has been used since
Emmanuel Nether Parts Gentlemen, we have medieval times, but from the mid 16th
before us an important mission for which century onwards it has often been expanded speed and efficiency are of the essence, and to every man for himself and the devil take
where surprise is the key element. the hindmost or, less commonly, every man
for himself and God for us all. eternal 1997 Daniel Quinn Mylshmael Tribes survive
the Eternal City a name for the city of by sticking together at all costs, and when it  
Rome. every man for himself, the tribe ceases to be a
eternal triangle a relationship between three tribe. 
people, typically a couple and the lover of every which way in al irections; in a
one of them, involving sexual rivalry. disorderly fashion. North American informal
even evil
an even break a fair chance, informal the evil eye a gaze or stare superstitiously
This phrase is perhaps best known from believed to cause harm. 
W. C. Fields scatchphrase Never give a suckerput off the evi ay or hour postpone
an even break. It is said to have originated something unpleasant for as long as
in the 1923 musical Poppy, and was also the
title of one of Field films 1941. 
possible. even Stephens or Stevens an even chance. exception
1990 Alan Duff Once Were Warriors And the exception that proves the rule a
give her half. Clean down the middle. Even particular case that is so unusual that it is
Stevens. don try and cheat her out of her evidence of the validity of the rule that
share. generally applies. get or be even with inflict similar trouble
This phrase comes from the Latin legal
or harm on someone as they have inflicted maxim exceptio probat regulum in casibus
on you. informal non exceptis exception proves the rule in the
on an even keel Qof a ship or aircraft not cases not excepted. This in fact meant that
tilting to one side. of a person or the recognition of something as an
exception proved the existence of a rule, butsituation functioning normally after a
the idiom is popularly used or understood to
period of difficulty. mean a person or thing that does not
01991 Deirdre Purcell A Place of Stones Life ran conform to the general rule affecting others
on an even keel in the house as both of them of that class. 
came and went and became re-immersed in
their own lives. 1998 Spectator The success of The Full Monty
in the United States is an exception which
ever proves the rule. On such lucky breaks,
industries and economies are not built. 
it was ever thus or so used as a humorous
way of suggesting that despite claims of
things having been better in the past exeunt
nothing much alters, informal exeunt omnes everyone leaves or goes away. 
1998 Bookseller Curious and surprising to say
the least and depressing things happen. But it The Latin phrase exeuntomnes means all !
was ever so. go out , and was used originally as a stage
direction in a printed play to indicate that all the actors leave the stage. every
every last or single used to emphasize
every member of a group. exhibition
1991 Colin Dexter The Jewel That Was Ours Onemake an exhibition of yourself behave in a
clue unfinished in a Listener puzzle, and he very foolish or ill-judged way in public. 97 eye
1930 J. B. Priestley Angel Pavement He d
expect invented the jobfiveminutes before, just to do
what can or do you expect? used to mother in the eye. 
emphasize that there was nothing eyes out on stalks full of eager curiosity or
unexpected about a person or event. amazement, informal
A more elaborate statement of the same 1999 Escape This breathtaking graphics
sentiment is the proverb what can you expect accelerator takes 3D game play on PCI systems
from a pig but a grunt? to a whole new dimension of excitement with
imagery so realistic your eyes will be out onstalks. eye give someone the glad eye look at
an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth someone in a way that clearly indicates
used to refer to the belief that retaliation in your sexual interest in them, informal
kind is the appropriate way to deal with an 1992 James Meek Last Orders If it was an
offence or crime. attractive woman, men would give her the
This expression refers to the law ofeye. 
retribution as set out in the Old Testament a gleam in someone eye: see GLEAM. 
Exodus 21:24, known as lex talionis. go eyes out make every effort. Australian
the eye of a needle a very small opening or informal
space used to emphasize the impossibility half an eye a slight degree of perception or
of a projected endeavour. attention. 
1962 Cyprian Ekwensi Burning Grass His
This phrase comes from Matthew 19:24: It sandals were new because it was market day;
is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a or perhaps he had half an eye to some maiden. 
needle, than for a rich man to enter the
kingdom of God. have an eye for be able to recognize,
appreciate, and make good judgements
2001 FourFourTwo Able to thread a pass about a particular thing. 
through the eye of a needle, he can play in the 2003 Observer Europe oldest continually
centre or on either flank. inhabited city is Cadiz, founded by the
the eye of the storm the calm region at Phoenicians in 1100 BC, but those wily
the centre of a storm or hurricane, the Phoenicians, with an eye for a good setting,
most intense part of a tumultous founded Malaka further along the
situation. Andalucian coast a few hundred years later in
01998 Times He Mr Yeltsin was now our 800 BC
heroic figure in the eye of the storm, have or with an eye for or on or to the
preaching defiance... from the top of a tank main chance look or be looking for an
outside the White House. opportunity to take advantage of a
be all eyes be watching eagerly and situation for personal gain, especially
attentively. when this is financial. 1958 Jessie Kesson The White Bird Passes
This expression is taken from the use of
Standing there all eyes and ears. Beat it before
main chance in the gambling game of
take the lights from you! hazard, where it refers to a number 5, 6, 7, or clap or lay or set eyes on see. informal 8calledbyaplayerbeforethrowingthedice. 1992 Barry Uns worth Sacred Hunger If we go by
the indications of the play, these two charmers have eyes bigger than your stomach have
have never clapped eyes on a man before, asked for or taken more food than you can
neverflirted,never known the sweets of actually eat. 
love. 
have eyes in the back of your head observe
get or keep your eye in become or remain
everything that is happening even whenable to make good judgements about a task
this is apparently impossible. 
or occupation in which you are engaged. 1991 Barbara Anderson Girls High They were
British all in Miss Royston class who said that she
close or shut your eyes to refuse to notice had eyes in the back of her head and they half
or acknowledge something unwelcome or believed it, because how else did she know. 
unpleasant. have square eyes: see SQUARE. 
do a person in the eye defraud, thwart, or hit someone in the eye or between the
humiliate a person. eyes be very obvious or impressive, informal
eyeball 982001 Independent When saw the technology shut your eyes to be wilfully ignorant of. 
in operation, it hit me between the eyes. was 1993 Isidore Okpewho Tides In the last few
happy to give him £20,000, and became a non- weeks, it has become clear to me that this
executive director. peace and quiet may elude me if shut my
keep an eye out or open for look out for eyes to the all too obvious suffering of people
something with particular attention. around me. 
1996 Guardian Keep an eye open for kingklip, turn a blind eye: see BLIND. 
a delectable fish, and the superb local hake. up to your eyes in very busy with or deeply
keep your eye on the ball: see BALL. involved in. informal
keep your eyes open or peeled or skinned what the eye doesn see, the heart doesn t
be on the alert; watch carefully or grieve over if you re unaware of an
vigilantly for something. unpleasant fact or situation you can be
make eyes at someone look at someone in a troubled by it. proverb
way that makes it clear you find them with one eye on giving some but not all your
attention to. 
sexually attractive. 1977 Craig Thomas Firefox With one eye on the
more to someone or something than meets PT jet-pipe temperature gauge he opened
the eye: see MEET. the throttles until the rpm gauges were at fifty my eye or all my eye and Betty Martin five percent and the whine had increased
nonsense, informal, dated comfortably. 
Who or what Betty Martin was has never with your eyes open in full awareness. 
been satisfactorily explained. Another 1999 Salman Rushdie The Ground Beneath Her
version of the saying also in use in the late Feet ve always liked to stick my face right up
18th century was all my eye and my elbow. against the hot sweaty broken surface of what
was being done, with my eyes open. 1991 Robertson Davies Murther & Walking
Spirits Of course many of the grievances are all with your eyes shut or closed without
my eye and Betty Martin Anna has picked up having to make much effort; easily,
this soldier phrase from her husband and without considering the possible
likes to use it to show how thoroughly British difficulties or consequences. 
she has become 1 9 4 New Scientist can knock off pages of
one in the eye for a disappointment or eco-babble for the UN with my eyes shut. 
setback for someone or something,
especially one that is perceived as being eyeball
wel eserved. eyeball to eyeball face to face with someone,
open someone eyes enlighten someone especially in an aggressive way. 
about certain realities; cause someone to
realize or discover something. give someone the hairy eyeball stare at
1998 Scoular Anderson 1314 & All That These someone in a disapproving or angry way,
especially with your eyelids partially
events opened his eyes to what had happened
lowered. North American informal
to his country. Now his one wish was that
1992 Guy Vanderhaeghe Things As They Are
Scotland should be independent. The commissioner giving him the hairy
pull the wool over someone eyes: see WOOL. eyeball all through the service didn do
see eye to eye have similar views or attitudes anything for Reg increasing bad humour
to something; be in full agreement. either. 
1997 A. Sivanandran When Memory Dies We up to the or your eyeballs used to
don see eye to eye about anything—work, emphasize the extreme degree of an
having children, what going on in the undesirable situation or condition, informal
country. 2000 Time Consumers are up to their eyeballs
—  -eye view a view from the position or in debt, and the strain shows. 
standpoint of the person or thing specified. 
The most common versions of this phrase eyebrow
are bird  -eye view see BIRD and worm  -eyeraise your eyebrows or an eyebrow show
view see WORM. surprise, disbelief, or mild disapproval. 
1982 Ian Hamilton Robert Lowell There is a kind
of double vision: the child eye view judged eyelash
and interpreted by the ironical narrator. by an eyelash by a very small margin. 
99 eye teeth
eye teeth The eye teeth are the two canine teeth in ithe upper jaw. 
cut your eye teeth: see cut your teeth at
CUT. 1930 W. Somerset Maugham Cakes & Ale He d
give your eye teeth for go to any lengths in give his eye-teeth to have written a book half
order to obtain something. as good. Ffface fact
the acceptable face of: see ACCEPTABLE. a fact of life something that must be
a face as long as a fiddle a dismal face. accepted and cannot be changed, however
face the music be confronted with the unpalatable. 
unpleasant consequences of your actions. the facts of life information about sexual
get out of someone face stop harassing or functions and practices, especially as given
annoying someone. North American informal to children or teenagers. 
have the brass face to have the effrontery fade
to do something, dated do a fade run away, informal
in your face aggressively obvious; assertive. 1990 Stephen King The Stand Two days ago, he
informal would probably have done a fade himself if he
1996 Sunday Telegraph The... campaign had seen someone. 
reflects a growing trend of aggressive and in
your face advertisement that is alarming fail
many within the industry. without fail absolutely predictably; with no
lose face suffer a loss of respect; be exception or cause for doubt. humiliated. 
Fail as a noun in the sense of failureThis expression was originally associated or deficiency is now only found in this
with China and was a translation of the
phrase. 
Chinese idiom tiu lien. make or pull a face or faces produce an faint
expression on your face that shows dislike, a faint heart timidity or lack of willpower
disgust, or some other negative emotion, preventing you from achieving your
or that is intended to be amusing. objective. 
not just a pretty face: see PRETTY. 
off your face very drunk or under the Faint heart never won fair lady is a
influence of illega rugs, informal proverb which dates in this wording from the 1998 Times Magazine ve been accused of early 17th century; the idea, however, was
around at least two centuries earlier. being off my face many times but you just go,
by osmosis, with the people that you re with. 
put a brave or bold or good face on faintest
something act as if something unpleasant not have the faintest idea have no idea. 
or upsetting is not as bad as it really is. informal
save face retain respect; avoid humiliation. 
1994 Thomas Boswell Cracking Show And Rose fair
got to save face, at least in his own eyes, with fair and square with absolute accuracy. 
one last brassy news conference. honestly and straightforwardly. 
save someone face enable someone to
a fair crack of the whip: see CRACK. avoid humiliation. a fair deal equitable treatment. 
set your face against oppose or resist with
determination. fair dinkum: see DINKUM. 
someone face fits someone has the fair dos used to request just treatment or
necessary qualities for something. to accept that it has been given. British informai
1992 Looks My facefitsand ve got the job! a fair field and no favour equal conditions in
throw something back in someone face a contest. 
reject something in a brusque or fair play to someone used as an expression
ungracious manner. of approval when someone has done101 famous
something praiseworthy or the right thing 1996 Sunday Post Unlike most people in
under the circumstances. Hollywood who starved to get there, just fell
on my feet. fair fair used to request just treatment or
assert that an arrangement is just, informal fall on stony ground: see STONY. 
2000 Sallee Vickers Miss Garnet Angel Jonah, fall over backwards: see BACKWARDS. 
the wandering prophet, reminded her too fall prey to: see PREY. 
much of her father. He was a bit of a misery,
fall short of Qof a missile fail to reach its
wasn he? But then, fair fair, living in the
belly of a whale must give one a different point target, be deficient or inadequate; fail to
of view. reach a required goal. 
for fair completely and finally. US informal take the fall receive blame or punishment,
1997 John Barth The Sot-Weed Factor And when typically in the place of another person. 
the matter of hostages arose, the mother had North American informal
said Pray God they will take Harry, for then
we be quit of him for fair, and not a penny In late 19th-century criminals slang fall
poorer. could mean an an arrest , and this was later ;
extended to mean a term of imprisonment. 
it a fair cop: see COP. ! From this the US term fall guy meaning a
no fair unfair often used in or as a petulant scapegoat developed in the early 20th
protestation. North American informal century. 
fairyaway with the fairies giving the false
impression of being mad, distracted, or a false dawn a misleadingly hopeful sign. 
in a dreamworld. A false dawn is literally a transient light in !
the sky which precedes the rising of the sun
fall by about an hour, commonly seen in Eastern fall apart at the seams: see come apart at the countries. 
seams at SEAM. 1992 Frank McLynn Hearts ofDarkness After five
fall between two stools: see STOOL. weeks Clapperton seemed to recover; it proved
merely a false dawn for two days laterfall from grace: see GRACE. Clapperton died. 
fall in or into line conform with others orwith accepted behaviour. family
This phrase originally referred to soldiers the or your family jewels a man genitals. 
arranging themselves into military informal: formation. 
in the family way pregnant, informal
fall off the back of a lorry of goods be sell the family silver part with a valuable
acquired in illegal or unspecified resource in order to gain an immediate
circumstances. advantage. 
The traditional bogus excuse given to the In 1985, the former British prime minister police by someone caught in possession of Harold Macmillan made a speech to the Tory
stolen goods was that the items in question Reform Group on the subject of privatization
had fallen off the back of a lorry. the selling off of nationalized industries to
private companies. He likened it to the
1991 Time Out People buy so much stolen stuff selling of heirlooms by impoverished
that... you can... buy a video in Dixons and aristocratic families: First of all the Georgian
take it round the corner to a pub, say it fell off silver goes... 
the back of a lorry and get 50 quid more than it
cost you. fall on deaf ears: see DEAF. famous
fall or land on your feet achieve a fortunate famous for being famous having no
outcome to a difficult situation. recognizable reason for your fame other
than high media exposure. 
This expression comes from cats famous for fifteen minutes especially of
supposed ability always to land on their an ordinary person enjoying a brief
feet, even if they fall or jump from a very
period of fame before fading back intohigh point. 
obscurity. fancy 102O In 1968, the pop artist Andy Warhol farm
1927-87 predicted that in the future
everybody will be world famous for fifteenbuy the farm: see BUY. 
minutes. Short-lived celebrity or notoriety is now often referred to as fifteen minutes offast
fame. fast and furious lively and exciting. 
2000 Independent We understand that the
famous last words said as an ironic bidding was fast and furious right up to the last
comment on or reply to an overconfident minute. 
assertion that may well soon be proved play fast and loose ignore your obligations;
wrong by events. be unreliable. 
This expression apparently originated as a Fast and loose was the name of an old
catchphrase in mid 20th-century armed fairground game, in which a punter was
forces slang. challenged to pin an intricately folded belt,
garter, or other piece of material to a surface. 
2000 Canberra Sunday Times Speaking from The person running the game would
New York, he said expect NASDAQ,to fall inevitably show that the item had not
more than another 5-10 per cent. Famous last been securely fastened or made fast , and so 
words, but expect it to break 3000, that is the punter would lose their money. The
about a 20 per cent descent. phrase came to be used to indicate
inconstancy. fancy 1996 Time Out The big MGM production
fancy your or someone chances believe typically plays fast and loose with the facts, so
that you or someone else are likely to be it as much an action spectacular as a genuine
successful. historical chronicle. 
in the fast lane where life is exciting orfantastic highly pressured. 
trip the light fantastic: see TRIP. 
pull a fast one try to gain an unfair advantage
by rapid action of some sort, informalfar
This phrase was originally early
be a far cry from be very different from. century US slang and is also found as put over 
1987 National Geographic walk out and hire a a fast one. 
helicopter... an expensive way to mine. And
a far cryfromthe ancient Maori canoe 1993 What Mortgage We also know what
expeditions... to hunt for jade. prices should be and will pull up any builder
far and away by a very large amount. trying to pull a fast one. 
1990 A. L. Kennedy Night Geometry bGarscadden Trains She enjoyed being far and
fataway the best cook. the fat is in the fire something has been said
or done that is about to cause trouble or
far be it from or for me to used to express
anger. reluctance, especially to do something
which you think may be resented. This expression refers to the sizzling and so far, so good progress has been satisfactory spitting caused by a spillage of cooking fat
up to now. : into an open flame. It was first used, in the
1998 New Scientist The project has just now mid 16th century, to indicate the complete
failure of a plan or enterprise. reached a rigorous testing phase, and the
researchers say so far, so good. live off or on the fat of the land have the
best of everything. fare-thee-well
In Genesis 45:18, Pharaoh tells Joseph sto a fare-thee-well to perfection;
brothers: ye shall eat the fat of the land. Fat thoroughly. US meaning the best part or choicest produce This expression is of late 18th-century is now found only in this expression. 
American origin, and is also found in the form to a fare-you-well. fate
1911 R. D. Saunders Colonel Todhunter The a fate worse than death a terrible
fight begun, and we ve got to rally around experience, especially that of seduction or
old Bill Strickland to a fare-you-well. rape. 
103 feast
1991 Thomas Hayden The Killing Frost He 1993 Merv Grist Life at the Tip Do me a favour,
dominated the conversation, holding the Webley couldn even pass a mug of tea across
Hackett and Townshend women spellbound the counter last season, let alone pass a ball. 
as he told of how he had broken up a white do someone a favour do something for
slave ring in Dublin, and how he had rescued
an innocent young girl from a fate worse than someone as an act of kindness. British informal
death. seal someone fate make it inevitable that favourite
something unpleasant will happen to favourite son a famous man who is
someone. particularly popular and praised for his
tempt fate: see TEMPT. achievements in his native area. 
In the USA, the term is used specifically
father of a person supported as a presidential
founding father: see FOUNDING. candidate by delegates from the candidate how your father sexual intercourse. British home state. 
informal
A pre-World War music-hall catchphrase, fear
how your father was earlier used to mean put the fear of God in or into someone
nonsense before acquiring its present sexual cause someone to be very frightened. 
sense. It is now used also to refer to a man  
penis. 
without fear or favour not influenced by any
consideration of the people involved in a
like father, like son a son character or situation; impartially. 
behaviour can be expected to resemble 1996 Japan Times It should be possible if all
that of his father. officials involved in the election process are
allowed to work without fear or favour and
The Latin version of this expression is keep their impartiality. 
qualis pater, talis filius. The female
equivalent, like mother, like daughter, is
based on Ezekiel 16:44: Behold, every one feast
that useth proverbs shall use this proverb feast your eyes on gaze at with pleasure. 
against thee, saying, As is the mother, so is
the daughter. feast of reason intellectual talk. 
This expression comes from the poet
Alexander Pope description of congenial
fatted conversation in Imitations of Horace: The
kill the fatted calf produce a lavish feast of reason and the flow of soul. 
celebratory feast. feast or famine either too much ofTheallusion is to the New Testament story something or too little. of the prodigal son Luke 15:11-32, in which the forgiving father orders his best calf to be a ghost or spectre at the feast someone or
killed in order to provide a feast to celebrate something that brings gloom or sadness to
the return of his wayward son. Fatted is an an otherwise pleasant or celebratory
archaic form of the verb fat meaning make occasion. 
or become fat. Nowadays we use the forms
fatten and fattened. The ghost or spectre of Banquo at the
feast in Shakespeare Macbeth is the most
famous literary instance of this. There are
fault other versions of the expression. A skeleton
— to a fault of someone or something at the feast dates from the mid 19th century !
displaying a particular commendable and probably refers to the ancient Egyptian
quality to an extent verging on excess. practice of having the coffin of a dead
1995 Bill Bryson Notes from a Small Island person, adorned with a painted portrait
of the deceased, present at a funeral
Anyway, that the kind of place Bournemouth
banquet. A death head at the feast alludes is—genteel to a fault and proud of it. to the use of a death head or skull as a
memento mori an object which serves as afavour reminder of death. 
do me a favour used as a way of expressing
brusque dismissal or rejection of a remark a movable feast an event which takes place
or suggestion. at no regular time. feather 104
In a religious context a movable feast is a fence
feast day especially Easter Day and the other Christian holy days whose dates are related to mend fences: see MEND. 
it which does not occur on the same calendar over the fence unreasonable or unaccept date each year. able. Australian & New Zealand informal
1964 Sydney Morning Herald Some publicationswhich unduly emphasize sex were entirely
feather over the fence. 
a feather in your cap an achievement to be sit on the fence avoid making a decision or
proud of. choice. Originally in the late 17th century, a
The two sides of a fence are seen here as jfeather in your cap was taken as a sign of
representing the two opposing or conflicting foolishness. However, by the mid 18th century positions or interests involved in a particular !
the phrase was acquiring its modern positive debate or situation. 
sense. 1998 Times To take six wickets in the 1995 Duncan McLean Bunker Man Let have a
last innings of the game was a feather in proper decision—goal or no goal— none of
his cap. this sitting on the fence. feather your own nest make money, fetch
usually illicitly and at someone else  
fetch and carry go backwards and forwardsexpense. 
bringing things to someone in a servile
This phrase refers to the way in which fashion. 
some birds use feathers their own or another bird to line the interior of their nest. This phrase was originally used to refer to a dog retrieving game that had been shot. 
1998 Spectator It won solve a damnedthing except feather the nests of a lot of dodgy
pen-pushers and party hacks. fettle
in fine or high feather in good spirits. in fine fettle in very good condition. 
Fettle was recorded in a mid 18th-century ;
The image here is of a bird in its
glossary of Lancashire dialect as meaning
breeding plumage, when it is in peak
dress, case, condition. It is now seldom! condition. 
found outside this phrase and its variants,
which include in good fettle and in high fettle, ishow the white feather: see WHITE. 
fed up few
fed up to the teeth or back teeth extremely few and far between scarce or infrequent. 
annoyed. have a few drink enough alcohol to be
slightly drunk, informal
feel 1991 James Kelman Events in Yer Life In fact
feel your age become aware that you are it hard to talk politics at al own there. 
growing older and less energetic. tend to keep my mouth shut. Unless ve
feel someone collar: see COLLAR. had a few. 
feel the draught: see DRAUGHT. fiddle
feel your oats: see OAT. a face as long as a fiddle: see FACE. 
feel the pinch: see PINCH. fiddle while Rome burns be concerned with
feel the pulse of: see PULSE. relatively trivial matters while ignoring the
serious or disastrous events going onfell around you. 
in or at one fell swoop all in one go. This phrase comes from the Roman
biographer and historian Suetonius This expression comes from Macduff  
description of the behaviour of the Roman
appalled reaction to the murder of his wife
emperor Nero during the great fire thatand children in Shakespeare Macbeth : Oh destroyed much of Rome in AD 64. 
hell-kite!... All my pretty chickens, and their dam At one fell swoop? fit as a fiddle in very good health. 
105 figure
hang up your fiddle retire from business; was claimed by General Mola as being
within Madrid when he besieged the city
give up an undertaking, chiefly US with four columns of Nationalist forces in
hang up your fiddle when you come home 1936. 
cease to be cheerful or entertaining when
you are in the company of your family. take the fifth in the USA exercise the
right of refusing to answer questions
chiefly USin order to avoid incriminating yourself. 
on the fiddle engaged in cheating or
swindling, informal The reference in this phrase is to Article Fiddle was late 19th-century US slang for of theten original amendments1791tothe Constitution of the United States, which
a swindle. states that no person.. shall be compelled
in any criminal case to be a witness against !
play second fiddle to take a subordinate rolehimself. to someone or something. 
The expression derives from therespective roles of the fiddles or violins in an jfig
orchestra. Both play first fiddle and play third in full fig wearing the smart clothes
fiddle are much less common. The implication appropriate for an event or occasion. 
of playing second fiddle is often that it is informal
somewhat demeaning. Fig in the sense of dress or equipment is 1998 Times In A Yank at Oxford she played now used only in this phrase, which was first second fiddle to Vivien Leigh, which never got recorded in the mid 19th century. 
anyone very far. 
not give or care a fig not have the slightest
field concern about. 
a fair field and no favour: see FAIR. Fig was formerly used in a variety of
hold the field remain the most important. expressions to signify something regarded as :
1991 Twentieth Century British History valueless or contemptible. 
What analyses of AIDS policies hold thefield?play the field indulge in a series of sexualfight
fight fire with fire use the weapons or
relationships without committing yourself
tactics of your enemy or opponent, evento anyone, informal
if you find them distasteful. 
1936 L. Lef ko Public Relations He hasn any
1998 New Scientist Many opponents of
steady. He plays thefield—blonde,brunette, biotechnology might say that they are
or what have you. simply fightingfirewithfire. After all,the biotechnology industry is not
fierce averse to misquoting people when it suits
something fierce to a great and almost them. 
overwhelming extent; intensely or fight like cat and dog: see CAT. 
furiously. North American informal
1986 Monica Hughes Blaine Way Maud fight a losing battle be fated to fail in your
had trapped my right arm against the efforts. 
chair and it was getting pins and needles fight or flight the instinctive physiological
something fierce. response to a threatening situation, which
readies you either to resist violently or to
fifteen run away. 
famous for fifteen minutes: see FAMOUS. fight shy of be unwilling to undertake or
become involved with. 
fifth 1992 Farmers Guardian Welsh companies
fifth column an organized group of people often fight shy of dealing with the big
sympathizing with and working for the multiples. 
enemy within a country at war orfight tooth and nail: see TOOTH. 
otherwise under attack. Fifth column is a translation of the figure
Spanish phrase quinta columna: during the figure of fun a person who is considered
Spanish Civil War, an extra body of supporters ridiculous. fill 106
1990 Richard Critchfield Among the British 1990 Wilfred Sheed Essays in Disguise If Sydney
Reagan was the first American leader in my blew away one fine day, Melbourne could
lifetime who was widely regarded over here as easily take its place as a center of mateship and
a figure of fun. conspicuous democracy. 
fill fine art
fill the bill: see BILL. have or get something down to a fine
fill someone shoes or boots take over art achieve a high level of skill, facility, or
someone function or duties and fulfil accomplishment in some activity through
them satisfactorily, informal experience. 
final finer
the final straw: see the last straw at STRAW. the finer points of the more complex or
detailed aspects of. findfind your feet stand up and become able tofinest
walk. establish yourself in a particular your finest hour the time of your greatest
success. situation or enterprise. 1940 W. S. Churchill Speech to House of Commons
1990 V. S. Naipaul India In Calcutta he
Let us therefore brace ourselves to that duty,
stayed with some friend or distant relation and so bear ourselves that, if the British
until he found his feet. Commonwealth and its Empire lasts for a
find God experience a religious conversion thousand years, men will still say, This was
or awakening. their finest hour. 
find it in your heart to do something allow or — finest the police of a specified city. North
force yourself to do something. American informal
1988 Richard Rayner Los Angeles Without a Map 2000 Nelson DeMille The Lion Game As Could you find it in your heart to lend me, say, indicated, was a homicide detective, one of
$2,500? New York Finest. finder finger
finders keepers losers weepers used, often be all fingers and thumbs be clumsy
humorously, to assert that whoever finds or awkward in your actions. British
something by chance is entitled to keep it informal
and the person who lost it will just have to
l the mid 16th century this idea was
lament its loss, informal expressed in the form each finger is a thumb. 
All thumbs developed in the 19th century as This expression has been widely used
an expression indicating a complete lack of
since the early 19th century, although the
dexterity. idea goes back much further and is found in ithe work of the Roman dramatist Plautus. A variant sometimes heard is findings keepings. burn your fingers or get your fingers
burnedburnt suffer unpleasant
consequences as a result of your actions. 
fine 1998 Times An American buyer remains a
cut it or things fine allow a very small possibility, although it is not entirely clear
why any would want to risk getting their
margin of something, usually time. fingers burnt twice. 
fine feathers beautiful clothes. cross your fingers: see CROSS. 
The proverb fine feathers make fine birds, get or pull your finger out cease
meaning that an eye-catching appearance
makes a person seem beautiful or impressive, prevaricating and start to act. British
has been known in England since the late informal
19th century. It is recorded in the early 16thgive someone the finger make a gesture
century in French as les belles plumes font les 
beaux oiseaux. with the middle finger raised as an obscene
sign of contempt. North American informal
not to put too fine a point on it to speak Since 1976, this gesture has sometimes
bluntly. been called the Rockefeller Gesture after
one fine day at some unspecified or Nelson Rockefeller was seen making it on a
news film. unknown time. 107 fire
have a finger in every pie be involved in a Abrams said that General Noriega was
large and varied number of activities or clinging to power by his fingertips. 
enterprises. to your fingertips totally; completely. 1991 Sun McMahon, a professional to his
have a finger in the pie be involved in a fingertips, gave it his best shot even though
matter, especially in an annoyingly an injury at this delicate stage could
interfering way. have sabotaged the last big move of hiscareer. 
have your fingers in the till: see TILL. 
have or keep your finger on the pulse beaware of all the latest news or develop- finish
ments. a fight to the finish a fight, contest, or match
lay a finger on touch someone, usually with which only ends with the complete defeat
the intention of harming them. of one of the parties involved. 
1993 Tony Parker May the Lord in His Mercy be
Kind to Belfast The one thing ll say about my
husband is he never laid a finger on the finished
children and he never hit me in front of them. the finished article something that is
point the finger openly accuse someone or complete and ready for use. 
apportion blame. 
1998 Spectator Reason suggests that one fire
should point the finger at those who whipped breathe fire be fiercely angry. 
up the emotion in the first place. 
put something on the long finger postpone The implied comparison in this expression is with a fire-breathing dragon. consideration of something; put
something off. Irish catch fire begin to burn. G become
put the finger on inform against someone to interesting or exciting. 
the authorities, informal 0 1 9 4 Coloradoan do not think this is
put your finger on identify something something that going to catchfireas a trend. 
exactly. fire and brimstone the supposed torments of
1988 Glenn Patterson Burning Your Own There hell. 
was something about the dinette that struck
him as peculiar, but he couldn quite put his In the Bible, fire and brimstone are the
finger on it. means of divine punishment for the wicked
see, for example, Genesis 19:24 or Revelation snap or click your fingers make a sharp 21:8. Brimstone from the Old English word clicking sound by bending the last joint of brynstân meaning burning stone is an
the middle finger against the thumb and archaic word for sulphur and is now rarely
suddenly releasing it, typically in order to found outside this phrase. 
attract attention in a peremptory way or to
accompany the beat of music. fire in the or your belly a powerful sense of
ambition or determination. 
twist or wind or wrap someone around 1991 Vanity Fair Bennett is quick to deny
your little finger have the ability to make feeling the fire in the belly generally
someone do whatever you want. considered a prerequisite for tenancy at 1600
work your fingers to the bone: see BONE. Pennsylvania Avenue. 
your fingers itch you are longing or go through fire and water face any peril. 
impatient to do something. 
1998 Patchwork & Quilting There a good This phrase originally referred to the
medieval practice of trial by ordeal, which
gallery towards the end of the book and it will
could take the form of making an accused
make your fingers itch to get started. person hold or walk on red-hot iron or of
throwing them into water. 
fingertip
at your fingertips especially of information light a fire under someone stimulate
readily available. someone to work or act more quickly orenthusiastically. North American
by your fingertips only with difficulty;
barely. play with fire: see PLAY. 
1990 Current History In early 1988, United set the world on fire: see set the world alight
States Assistant Secretary of State Elliott at SET. fireman 108
under fire Qbeing shot at. being selected by achievement of a simple
rigorously criticized. majority. British
1993 Albuquerque New Mexico Journal Zoe
Baird, under fire for hiring illegal aliens to first thing early in the morning; before
work in her home, has withdrawn her name as anything else. 
President Clinton nominee for US Attorney first things first important matters should be
General. attended to before anything else. 
where the fire? used to ask someone why First Things First was the title of a book by they are in such a hurry or in a state of George Jackson, subtitled Addresses to
agitation, informal young men 1894. 
1963 J. F. Straker Final Witness Where the
fire, dear boy? he drawled. Do we really have first up first of all. at the first attempt. 
to run for it? Australian
get to first base: see BASE. 
fireman of the first order or magnitude used to
visiting fireman: see G. denote something that is excellent or
considerable of its kind. firing
firing on all four cylinders working or astronomy, magnitude is a measure of the degree of brightness of a star. Stars of the functioning at a peak level. 
first magnitude are the most brilliant. This expression is a metaphor from an
internal-combustion engine: a cylinder is said of the first water: see WATER. 
to be firing when the fuel inside it is ignited. 
1998 Entertainment Weekly Even when his fish
imagination isn firing on all cylinders, Amis big fish: see big cheese at BIG. 
is still worth picking up, if only to enjoy the
azzy rhythm of his prose. a big fish in a small or little pond a person
seen as important and influential onlyfirm within the limited scope of a small
be on firm ground be sure of your facts or organization or group. 
secure in your position, especially in a drink like a fish: see DRINK. 
discussion. fish in troubled waters make a profit out of
a firm hand strict discipline or control. trouble or upheaval. 
Often used in the the fuller form, a firm fish or cut bait stop vacillating and decide to
hand on the reins, this phrase is employing act on or disengage from something. North
the image of controlling a horse by using the reins. American informala fish out of water a person who is in a
completely unsuitable environment orfirst situation. 
first among equals: see EQUAL. 1991 Margaret Weiss King Test He realized
first blood: see BLOOD. that he was a fish out of water—a pilot in the
first come, first served used to indicate that midst of marines. 
have other or bigger fish to fry have
people will be dealt with strictly in the
other or more important matters to
order in which they arrive or apply. 
attend to. 
first off as a first point; first of all. informal, 1985 Gregory Benford Artifact Kontos can
chiefly North American throw a fit back there, chew the rug,
1991 Globe & Mail Toronto First off, wouldn anything—it won matter. His government
worry about the fashionability of any has bigger fish to fry. 
particular garment. If you like to wear like shooting fish in a barre one very easily. 
something, then wear it. 1992 Laurie Colwin Home Cooking fear
first past the post Qof a contestant, that the urgency of greed. Picking cultivated
especially a horse, in a race winning a berries is like shooting fish in a barrel. 
race by being the first to reach the finishing neither fish nor fowl nor good red herring
line. denoting an electoral system of indefinite character and difficult to
whereby a candidate or party is identify or classify. 
109 flagThis expression arose with reference to five
dietary laws formerly laid down by the
Church during periods of fasting ortake five take a short break; relax. 
abstinence. : Five here is short for a five-minute break , 
a pretty kettle of fish: see KETTLE. 
there are plenty more fish in the sea used to fix
console someone whose romantic fix someone wagon bring about
relationship has ended by pointing out that someone downfall; spoil someone  
chances of success. US
there are many other people with whom1951 Truman Capote The Grass Harp She
they may have a successful relationship in
said her brother wouldfixmy wagon,
the future. which he did... ve still got a scar where
This expression alludes to the proverb he hit me. 
there are as good fish in the sea as ever came get a fix on determine the position of an
out of it. aircraft, ship, etc.by visual or radio
bearings or astronomical observation. 
assess or determine the nature or
fishing facts of; obtain a clear understanding of. 
a fishing expedition a search or informal
investigation undertaken with the hope, 0 1 9 3 Independent on Sunday You do not
though not the stated purpose, of necessarily get afixon life by fooling around
discovering information. with thefictiveprocess. 
1998 High Country News Agency insidersdescribe the inquiry as a fishing expedition to
uncover evidence that Dombeck may have flag
been a party to illegal lobbying. fly the flag of a ship be registered to a
particular country and sail under its flag. 
fist 0 represent or demonstrate support for
an iron fist in a velvet glove: see an iron your country, political party, or
hand in a velvet glove at IRON. 
organization, especially when you are
make a — fist of do something to a specified abroad. 
degree of success, informal
1998 Times An opening stand of 99 by Hancock In sense 2, the forms show the flag, carry 
and Hewson helped Gloucestershire to make a the flag, and wave the flag are also found. 
decent fist of it yesterday. 01996 Hello Sheflewtheflagfor British
tennis in the Eighties. 
fitkeep the flag flying represent your
fit the bill: see fill the bill at BILL. country or organization, especially when
fit as a fiddle: see FIDDLE. abroad. show continued commitment to
fit as a flea: see FLEA. something, especially in the face of
fit for the gods excellent; extremely pleasing. adversity. 
fit like a glove: see GLOVE. This expression comes from the practice in fit to be tied very angry, informal 1 naval warfare of lowering the flag on a
defeated ship to signify a wish to surrender. 
1988 Joan Smith A Masculine Ending He was fit
to be tied when separatedfromHugh, and he
put the flags or flag out celebrate publicly. 
seems to blame me for the whole thing. 
show the flag of a naval vessel make an
fit to bust with great energy. official visit to a foreign port, especially as a
1992 Daphne Glazer The Last Oasis be show of strength. 
rushing back at night, pedalling on my bike fit
to bust. wrap yourself in the flag make an
excessive show of your patriotism,
give someone a fit greatly shock, frighten, especially for political ends, chiefly North
or anger someone, informal American
in fits in a state of hysterical amusement. 1993 Globe & Mail Canada For a politician at
informal election time, wrapping oneself in the
Canadian flag is a reflex action, as irresistible
in or by fits and starts with irregular burstsas bussing a baby. of activity. 
flagpole 110
1998 Field Farming and forestry were both
flagpole caughtflat-footedwhen fashion changed. 
run something up the flagpole test thepopularity of a new idea or proposal. flatter
The idea behind this expression is of flatter to deceive encourage on insufficient
hoisting a particular flag to see who salutes. grounds and cause disappointment. 
1913 Field Two furlongs from home MaidenErlegh looked most dangerous, but he
flame flattered only to deceive. an old flame a former lover, informal
shoot or something inflatting
go flatting leave the family home to live in a
flames: see T. flat. Australian & New Zealand
flapping
someone ears are flapping: see A R. flavour
flavour of the month someone or something
flash that enjoys a short period of great
flash in the pan a thing or person whose popularity; the current fashion. 
sudden but brief success is not repeated or This phrase originated in a marketing
repeatable. campaign in American ice-cream parlours in
the 1940s, when a particular flavour of ice
This phrase developed from the priming cream would be singled out each month for !
of a firearm, the flash being from an special promotion. 
explosion of gunpowder within the lock. 

1998 New Scientist But Java... may turn out to flea
be flash in the pan: books on human- fit as a flea in very good health. 
computer interaction struggle to stay abreast
of rapid developments in computing. The phrase makes reference to a flea  
quick as a flash especially of a person ! agility. 
response or reaction happening or madea flea in your ear a sharp reproof. 
very quickly. Formerly a flea in your ear also meant
flat something that agitates or alarms you, as
fall flat fail completely to produce the does the French phrase avoir la puce à
l oreille. Nowadays, it is often found in theintended or expected effect. 
phrases give someone a flea in the ear or send fall flat on your face fall over forwards. someone away with a flea in their ear. 
fail in an embarrassingly obvious way. 
flat as a pancake: see A A K flesh
flat out as fast or as hard as possible, informal go the way of all flesh die or come to an end. 
w t hesitation or reservation;
unequivocally, chiefly North American In the Authorized Version of the Bible all 
flesh is used to refer to all human and animal 0 1 9 5 Independent Since August 1993 she
I fe. has been working flat out on her latest three
part documentary 1 9 3 Coloradoan She flat in the flesh in person rather than via a
out said she didn trust her fellow boardmembers. telephone, film, article, etc. 
on the flat on level ground as opposed make someone flesh creep or crawl
to uphill, of a horse race on an cause someone to feel fear, horror, or
open course as opposed to one with disgust. jumps. put flesh on the bones of something add
more details to something which exists
flat-footed only in a draft or outline form. 
catch flat-footed take someone by your pound of flesh: see D. 
surprise or at a disadvantage, informal
flesh and blood
The opposite of flat-footed in this your own flesh a blood near relatives;
metaphorical sense is on your toes see TOE. close family. 
111 flush
flex meeting or assembly, rather than by a
flex your muscles give a show of strength or representative on the platform. 
power. take the floor begin to dance on a dance
1998 Times Mr Prescott isflexinghis muscles floor. speak in a debate or assembly. 
and the City is wondering just how far he is
prepared to go. flotsam
flotsam and jetsam useless or discardedflexible objects. flexible friend a credit card. 
Flotsam refers to the wreckage of a ship
This phrase comes from the advertising or its cargo found floating on or washed up
slogan Access—your flexible friend. bythesea, whileersam is unwanted material thrown overboard from a ship and washed
ashore. The two nouns are seldom used
flick independently, almost always appearing
give someone the flick or get the flick together in this phrase. 
reject someone or be rejected in a casual
or offhand way. informal, chiefly Australian flowflight go with the flow be relaxed; accept a
situation, informal
in full flight escaping as rapidly as possible. 
1938 Life A week later General Cedillo was The image here is of going with the
reported in full flight through the bush, with current of a stream ratherthan trying to swim Federal troops hot on his heels. against it. 1997 -l 7 Go with the flow today. You can t
flip change the way things are going to pan out, so
flip your lid suddenly go mad or lose your ust let it all happen. 
self-control, informal
in full flow talking fluently and easily and
A chiefly US variant of this phrase is flip showing no sign of stopping. performing
your wig. vigorously and enthusiastically. flower
flit the flower of — the finest individuals out of
do a moonlight flit: see MOONLIGHT. a number of people or things. 
float Middle and early modern English did not
float someone boat appeal to or excite recognize the modern distinction in spelling !
someone, especially sexually, informal and sense between flower and flour, and the
earliest instances of this expression relate to
the sense that in modern English would be
flog spelt flour, referring to the finest part of the flog a dead horse waste energy on a lost wheat. 
cause or unalterable situation. 
1971 Cabinet Maker & Retail Furnisher If this is 1991 Pat Robertson New World Order This
the case, we areflogginga dead horse in still vainglorious conqueror wasted theflowerof
trying to promote the scheme. French youth on his own persona reams ofempire. flood fluff
be in full flood Qof a river be swollen and bit of fluff: see BIT. 
overflowing its banks, have gained
momentum; be at the height of activity. flush
0 1 9 1 journal ofTheological Studies There is too
a busted flush: see BUSTED. 
much detail for comfort... which is somewhat
confusing when exposition is in full flood. in the first flush in a state of freshness and
vigour. 
floor The exact origins of flush as a noun
cross the floor: see CROSS. are unknown; early senses share the idea of a sudden rush or abundance of something g. from the floor of a speech or questionwater, growth of grass, or emotion. 
delivered by an individual member at aflutter 112
1997 Tom Petsinis The French Mathematician A 1998 Times Before you conclude that have
month ago, in thefirstflushof enthusiasm... become a raging Europhile, let me say that
tackled the classic problem of trisecting an there is a fly in the ointment. 
angle using only a compass and straightedge. fly a kite try something out to test opinion. 
informalflutterA historical sense of this phrase was raise ;
flutter the dovecotes alarm, startle, or upset
money by an accommodation bill , meaning
a sedate or conventionally minded to raise money on credit, and this sense of
community. testing public opinion of your creditworthi ness gave rise to the current figurative
This expression may come from
sense. The US phrase go fly a kite! means
Shakespeare Coriolanus: like an eagle in a go away!. 
dove-cote, Fluttered your Volscians in
Corioli. Compare with put the cat among the ifly the nest of a young person leave their
pigeons at CAT. 
parent home to set up home elsewhere. 
1992 Daily Telegraph It is however the arrival of informal
Michael Heseltine at the DTI that will flutter
the dovecotes most of all. The image here is of a young bird  
departure from its nest on becoming able to flutter your eyelashes open and close fly. Compare with empty nester at EMPTY. 
your eyes rapidly in a coyly flirtatious
manner. fly off the handle lose your temper suddenly
and unexpectedly, informal
fly This expression uses the image of a loose !
die or drop like flies die or collapse in large ! head of an axe flying off its handle while the numbers. axe is being swung. 
drink with the flies drink alone. Australian &
New Zealand informal a fly on the wall an unnoticed observer of a
1963 D. Whitington Mile Pegs Have a drink? particular situation. 
the larrikin invited. Or do you prefer drinking This expression is often used as an
with the flies? adjective, as in a fly-on-the-wall
fly the coop make your escape, informa ocumentary, where it refers to a film 1991 Julia Phillips You ll Never Eat Lunch In This making technique in which events are merely Town Again Has David left? Nah, he would want observed and presented realistically with
to make sure really ensconced, or might minimum interference, rather than acted out fly the coop. under direction. 
fly the flag: see FLAG. a fly on the wheel a person who
fly high be very successful; prosper. overestimates their own influence. 
The noun high-flyer or high-flier : This phrase stems from Aesop fable of a meaning a successful and ambitious person fly sitting on the axletree of a moving chariot developed from this phrase in the mid 17th and saying, See what a dust raise. 
century. like a blue-arsed fly in an extremely hectic or
a fly in amber a curious relic of the past, frantic way. British vulgar slang
preserved into the present. 
The blue-arsed fly referred to is a
The image is of the fossilized bodies of ! bluebottle, well known for its frenetic
insects which are often found preserved in buzzing about. 
amber. 1998 Rebecca Ray A Certain Age not going
fly in the face of be openly at variance with to run around like a blue-arsed fly pandering
to you and your bloody room, alright?
what is usual or expected. 
on the fly Qwhile in motion, while busy
a fly in the ointment a minor irritation or or active. of an addition or modification
other factor that spoils the success or in computing carried out during the
enjoyment of something. running of a program without interrupting
This expression alludes to Ecclesiastes the run. 10:1: Dead flies cause the ointment of the
there are no flies on — the person
apothecary to send forth a stinking savour. 
mentioned is very quick and astute. 113 foot
Early instances of this expression suggest follow suit Qin bridge, whist, and other
that it originated with reference to cattle card games play a card of the suit led. 
who were so active that no flies settled on conform to another actions. 
them. The phrase was noted in the mid 19th 2002 History of Scotland The first Earl of
century as being very common in Australia as Huntly was a Gordon by adoption. Many other
a general expression of approbation. In the lesser men followed suit, assuming the
USA it could also be used to convey that the surname of so successful a family. 
person in question was of superior breeding
or behaved honestly. food
wouldn hurt or harm a fly used to food for thought something that warrants
emphasize how inoffensive and harmless a serious consideration or reflection. 
person or animal is. foolflyer a fool and his money are soon parted a
take a flyer take a chance, chiefly North foolish person spends money carelessly
American and will soon be penniless, proverb
1998 Times Or we i. journalists can take fools rush in where angels fear to tread
a flyer: share a hunch and risk coming people without good sense or judgement
a cropper. will have no hesitation in tackling asituation that even the wisest would avoid. 
flying proverbwith flying colours with distinction. 
be no or nobody fool be a shrewd or
Formerly, in military contexts, flying prudent person. 
colours meant having the regimental flag
fool gold something deceptively attractive
flying as a sign of success or victory; aconquered army usually had to lower or
and promising in appearance. strike its colours. Fool gold is the name popularly given to ! any yellow metal, such as pyrite orchalcopyrite, that may be mistaken for gold. Flynn
be in like Flynn seize an opportunity; be 2003 Nation Many good people have been
successful. Australian euchred into falling for the current fool  
gold—politicians and lobbyists calling for
The Flynn referred to in this expression is universal healthcare. 
Errol Flynn, the Australian-born actor, who
had a reputation as a notable playboy. more fool — used as an exclamation
indicating that a specified person is unwise
1987 Kathy Lette Girls Night Out Russell to behave in such a way. 
brightened. Really? in, he thought to 2002 Pride Any self-respecting female should
himself. in like Flynn. You really see it that be wise enough to steer clear of Romeo rats
way? He slid his arms around her. and, if you don t, then more fool you. 
foam there no fool like an old fool the foolish
behaviour of an older person seems
foam at the mouth: see froth at the mouth at
especially foolish as they are expected to
FROTH. 
think and act more sensibly than a youngerone. proverbfog
in a fog in a state of perplexity; unable to
think clearly or understand something. foot
dig in your feet: see dig in your heels at DIG. foggiest drag your feet: see DRAG. 
not have the foggiest idea or notion have fall on your feet: see FALL. 
no idea at all. informal, chiefly British foot the bill: see BILL. 
get or start off on the right or wrong foot
follow make a good or bad start at something,
follow in someone footsteps: see FOOTSTEP. especially a task or relationship. 
follow your nose trust to your instincts. 1998 Spectator This relationship got off on
move along guided by your sense of the wrong foot... when Mr Cook scathing
smell. go straight ahead. attack on the government over the arms-to-footloose 114
Iraq affair was felt to include some officials made a point of not talking to me, realized
as well. that put my foot in it. 
get your feet under the table establish put a foot wrong make any mistake in
yourself securely in a new situation, chiefly performing an action. 
British 1999 Times For 71 holes of the Open he didn t
put a foot wrong. 
get your feet wet begin to participate in an
be run off your feet: see N. 
activity. six feet under: see x. 
have feet of clay have a fatal flaw in a
character that is otherwise powerful or sweep off their feet quickly and
admirable. overpoweringly charm someone. 
This expression alludes to the biblical think on your feet: see THINK. 
account of a magnificent statue seen in a vote with your feet: see VOTE. 
dream by Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon,
ltwasconstructedfromfinemetals,allexcept for its feet which were made of clay; when footloose
these were smashed, the whole statue was footloose and fancy-free without any
brought down and destroyed. Daniel commitments or responsibilities; free to
interprets this to signify a future kingdom act or travel as you please. 
that will be partly strong, and partly broken , and will eventually fal aniel 2:31-5. Footloose was used literally in the late
17th century to mean free to move the feet ,
have a foot in both camps have an interest or The sense without commitments originated
stake in two parties or sides without in late 19th-century US usage. Fancy in fancy- 
commitment to either. free is used in the sense of love or the object
1992 Community Care As EWOs Education of someone affections. 
Welfare Officers we have a foot in bothcamps. We work with the children and their
families and the school and bring the twofootsie
together. play footsie with someone touch
someone feet lightly with your own feet,
have or get a foot in the door have or gain
usually under a table, as a playful
a first introduction to a profession orexpression of romantic interest, work
organization. with someone in a cosy and covert way. 
have one foot in the grave be near death
through old age or illness, informal, often footstep
humorous follow or tread in someone footsteps do
have or keep your feet on the g be as another person did before, especially in
making a journey or following an
or remain practical and sensible. occupation. 
have something at your feet have
something in your power or command. for
keep your feet: see KEEP. be for it be in imminent danger of
put your best foot forward embark on an punishment or other trouble. British informal
undertaking with as much speed, effort, 1997 Peter Carey Jack Maggs The master. He
and determination as possible. reads to me. He would be reading to me now
put foot up; get a move on. South African but said was ill and must go back to my bed. 
informal for it if he finds me gone. 
put your foot down adopt a firm policy there or that — for you used ironically
when faced with opposition or to indicate a particularly good example of a
disobedience make a motor vehicle go quality or thing mentioned. 
faster by pressing the accelerator pedal 1982 William Least Heat-Moon Blue Highways
with your foot. British informal Satchel Paige—there a name for you—old
put your foot in it or put your foot in your Satch could fire the pill a hundred and five
mouth say or do something tactless or miles an hour. 
embarrassing; commit a blunder orindiscretion, informal forbidden
1992 Deirdre Madden Remembering Light & forbidden fruit a thing that is desired all the
Stone As the evening went on, and people more because it is not allowed. 
115 fourthThe original forbidden fruit was that formforbiddentoAdamintheGardenofEden: But a matter of form: see MATTER. of the tree of the knowledge of good and
evil, thou shalt not eat of it Genesis 2:17. 
fortunefortune favours the brave a successful
force person is often one who is willing to take
force someone hand make someone act
risks, proverbprematurely or do something they dislike. 
the fortunes of war the unpredictable
force the issue compel the making of an
events of war. immediate decision. a small fortune a large amount of money. 
force the pace adopt a fast pace in a race in
order to tire out your opponents quickly. informal
in force in great strength or numbers. soldier of fortune: see R. 
1989 Amy Wilentz The Rainy Season They forty
turned out in force, armed with machetes and forty winks a short sleep or nap, especially
cocomacaques. during the day. informal
forelock This expression dates from the early 19th take time by the forelock seize an century, but wink in the sense of a closing of the eyes for sleep is found from the late 14th opportunity, literarycentury. 
T Latin writer Phaedrus described
Opportunity or Occasion as being bald except fora long forelock, a personification that was foul
illustrated in Renaissance emblem books and foul your own nest do something damaging
was applied also to Time. or harmful to yourself or your own
interests. 
touch or tug your forelock raise a hand to
your forehead in deference when meeting The proverb it an ill bird that fouls its
a person of higher social rank. own nest, used of a person who criticizes or
abuses their own country or family, has been found in English since the early 15th century, forkMorton fork: see MORTON. founding
forked founding father someone who establishes
with forked tongue untruthfully or an institution. 
deceitfully, humorousFoundingFathersused in particularof an : The image is of the forked tongue of a American statesman at the time of the
snake, snakes being traditional symbols of Revolution, especially a member of the
treachery and deceit. Federal Constitutional Convention of 1787. 
2002 New York Times Orpheus members havelong spoken with forked tongues about four
conductors. They... make sweeping on all fours with equal with; presenting an
generalizations about them. exact analogy with. 
1992 Independent President Saddam  
forlorn occupation of Kuwait was, he declared, on all
a forlorn hope a faint remaining hope or fours with Hitler aggressions. 
chance; a desperate attempt. to the four winds: see to the wind at WIND. 
This expression developed in the mid 16thcentury from the Dutch expression verloren fourth
hoop lost troop. The phrase originally the fourth estate the press; the profession of
denoted a band of soldiers picked to begin an ournalism. 
attack, many of whom would not survive; the
equivalent French phrase is enfants perdus : The three traditional Estates of the Realm lost children. The current sense, which dates the Crown, the House of Lords, and the
from the mid 17th century, arose from a House of Commons are now viewed as
misunderstanding of the etymology. having been joined by the press, which isfox 116
regarded as having equal power. As early as body melancholy, phlegm, blood, and
1843 Lord Macaulay stated: The gallery in choler, blood was the hot, moist element, so
which the reporters sit has become a fourth the effect of horror or fear in making the
estate of the realm. blood cold was to make it unable to fulfil its
proper function of supplying the body with
vital heat or energy. Compare with makefox your blood run cold at BLOOD. 
crazy like a fox: see CRAZY. 
frame French
be in or out of the frame Qbe or not be excuse or pardon my French used to
eligible or the centre of attention, under apologize for swearing, informal
suspicion or wanted or not by the police. French has been used since the late 19th century as a euphemism for bad language. Frankenstein
Frankenstein monster a thing that 1992 Angela Lambert A Rather English Marriage
becomes terrifying or destructive to its A loony can change a bloody toilet-roll, pardon
maker. my French. take French leave make an unannounced or
Frankenstein was the title of a novel unauthorized departure. 
written in 1818 by Mary Shelley. The scientist Frankenstein creates and brings to life a This expression stems from the custom
manlike monster which eventually turns on prevalent in 18th-century France of leaving a 
him and destroys him; Frankenstein is not the reception or entertainment without saying
name of the monster itself, as is often goodbye to your host or hostess. 
assumed. 1991 John Kingdom Local Government & Politics fresh
in Britain The factories of the bourgeoisie hadbe fresh out of something have just
created another dangerous by-product, a
Frankenstein monster posing a constant sold or run out of a supply of something. 
sense of threat—the working class. informal
break fresh ground: see break new groundfree at GROUND. 
for free without cost or payment; free of a breath of fresh air: see BREATH. 
charge, informalfresh as a daisy: see DAISY. 
1957 Godfrey Smith The Friends Back home we
pay if we re ill... You don expect to be ill for fresh blood: see new blood at BLOOD. 
free. free and easy informal and relaxed. friend
a fair-weather friend someone who cannot
free, gratis, and for nothing without charge. be relied on in a crisis. 
humorous 1998 Spectator The Americans gave up
free rein: see REIN. supplying gold on demand to other countries 
it a free country said when asserting that a central banks at £35 an ounce... when their
fair-weather friends from London threatenedcourse of action is not illegal or forbidden,
to turn up and clean them out. 
often in justification of it. flexible friend: see FLEXIBLE. 
make free with treat without ceremony or
proper respect; take liberties with. a friend at court a person in a position to use
influence on your behalf. 
there no such thing as a free lunch: seeLUNCH. friends in high places people in senior
positions who are able and willing to usefreeze their influence on your behalf
freeze the balls off a brass monkey: see brass
monkey at BRASS. fright
freeze your blood fill you with feelings of look a fright have a dishevelled or grotesque
fear or horror. appearance, informal
According to the medieval physiological frighten
scheme of the four humours in the human frighten the daylights out of: see DAYLIGHT. 
117 fullfrighten the life out of: see LIFE. fruit
frightened bear fruit have good results. 
frightened of your own shadow: see This expression is a biblical metaphor,
afraid of your own shadow at SHADOW. found, for example, in Matthew 13:23: But
he that received seed into the good ground is be frightened out of your wits: see WIT. he that heareth the word, and understandeth
be frightened to death: see DEATH. it; which also beareth fruit, and bringeth
forth, some an hundredfold, some sixty, somethirty. frightener
put the frighteners on threaten or
intimidate. British informal frying
out of the frying pan into the fire from a bad
Literally, a frightener is a thug whointimidates victims on behalf of a gang. 
situation to one that is worse. 
1998 John Milne Alive & Kicking She decides fudgeto
put the frighteners on him by hiring me as a fudge factor a figure which is included in a
private detective. calculation in order to account for some
unquantified but significant phenomenon
fritz or to ensure a desired result. 
go or be on the fritz of a machine stop
working properly. North American informal Fudge, apparently originating in the mid 18th century as an exclamation of disgust or The nature of any connection with Fritz, irritation, later acquired a specific verbal
the derogatory nickname for a German, is sense in printers jargon, meaning to do
uncertain. The related phrase put the fritz on work imperfectly or as best you can with the means put a stop to something. materials available. frog fuel
have a frog in your throat lose your voice or add fuel to the fire or flames of a person or
find it hard to speak because of hoarseness circumstance cause a situation or conflict
or an apparent impediment in your throat. to become more intense, especially by
informal provocative comments. front full
front of house the parts of a theatre in at full cock of a firearm with the cock lifted
front of the proscenium arch, the to the position at which the trigger will act. 
business of a theatre that concerns the at full stretch: see STRETCH. 
audience, such as ticket sales. come full circle: see CIRCLE. 
on the front burner: see on the back burner in full cry: see CRY. 
at BURNER. 
full as a goog: see GOOG. 
frosty the full monty: see MONTY. 
it ll be a frosty Friday in July used to full of beans: see BEAN. 
indicate that something is very unlikely to full of years having lived to a considerable
happen. Canadian informal age. archaic
1990 Walter Stewart Right Church, Wrong Pew It
would be afrostyFriday in the middle of July Full of years is an expression originating
before he would discuss personal affairs with in the Authorized Version of the Bible: an old
the press. man, and full of years Genesis 25:8. full pelt: see PELT. 
froth full steam or speed ahead used to indicate
froth or foam at the mouth be very angry. that you should proceed with as much
This phrasestems from the involuntary speed or energy as possible. 
production of large amounts of saliva from
the mouth during a seizure or fit. in full fig: see FIG. 
in full flight: see FLIGHT. 
fullness 118
in full flow: see FLOW. the fur will fly there will be serious, perhaps
in full swing: see SWING. violent, trouble, informal
not the full quid: see QUID. This phrase originated in the early 19th
not playing with a ful eck: see DECK. century, in the US. The image is of a furious
fight between dogs or cats. on a full stomach: see STOMACH. 
to the full to the greatest possible extent. 
full whack: see top whack at WHACK. furiouslygive someone furiously to think: see THINK. fullness
the fullness of your or the heart great or
furniture
overwhelming emotion, literary part of the furniture a person or thing that
has been somewhere so long as to seem a
in the fullness of time after a due length of permanent, unquestioned, or invisible
time has elapsed; eventually. feature of the scene, informalfun furypoke fun at: see POKE. 
like fury with great energy or effort, informal
fund This expression dates from the mid
in funds having money to spend. British 19thcentury, but fury has been used of things that operate with irresistible force since the
funeral late 16th century g. the fury of the sea. 
it or that someone funeral used to 1994-5 Game Gazette was to fish it the
warn someone that an unwise act or Zambesi for the legendary Tiger
decision is their own responsibility, informal fish... that... has a mouth of teeth like a
1996 Amitav Ghosh The Calcutta Chromosome canteen of cutlery and fights like fury. 
ll turn a few pages for you; but remember, it
was you who asked. It your funeral. fuse
light the fuse: see LIGHT. funnysee the funny side of something appreciate future
the humorous aspect of a situation or future shock a state of distress or
experience. disorientation due to rapid social or
technological change. fur
be all fur coat and no knickers have an This phrase was coined by the American
impressive or sophisticated appearance writer Alvin Toff 1er in Horizon 1965, where he defines it as the dizzying disorientation
which belies the fact that there is nothing brought on by the premature arrival of the
to substantiate it. British informal future. 
fur and feather game animals and birds. Gggad game
on or upon the gad on the move. ahead of the game: see AHEAD. 
The noun gad is archaic and is now used beat someone at their own game: see
only in this expression. The verb gad meaning BEAT. 
go from one place to another in search of as g a as Ned Kelly brave. Australian
pleasure , is more familiar today; both
may have their origins in an obsolete Ned Kelly 1855-80 was a famous
word gadling, meaning a wanderer or Australian outlaw, the leader of a band of
vagabond. horse and cattle thieves and bank raiders
operating in Victoria; he was eventually
hanged at Melbourne. gaff
blow the gaff reveal or let out a plot or the game is up the plan, deception, or crime
secret. is revealed or foiled. game on a signal for play to begin in a
j The word gaff is recorded from the early game or match. said when you feel that a
j 19th century, but its origins are uncertain. 
situation is about to develop in your favour. 
informal
gaiety 01999 FHM She soon invited me back to her
the gaiety of nations general cheerfulness or place for the other. Game on!
amusement. British game over said when a situation is regarded
In The Lives of the English Poets, Samuel as hopeless or irreversible. 
ohnson wrote about the death of the greatThis expression probably comes from the actor David Garrick 1717-79, remarking
use of the phrase at the conclusion of a
that it has eclipsed the gaiety of nations andcomputer game. 
impoverished the public stock of harmless
pleasure. 2001 Wall StreetJournal There a finite amount
of money available, and, if it runs out, game
over. gait
go your or your own gait pursue your own give the game away inadvertently reveal
course, dated your own or another intentions. 
1940 Herbert Read Annals of Innocence These the name of the game: see NAME. 
are qualities to be enjoyed by non-poetic off or on your game playing badly or well. 
people: the poet must go his own gait. 
on the game involved in prostitution. British
informalgall
dip your pen in gall: see DIP. The phrase itself apparently dates from
the late 19th century, but game in the sense
wormwood and gall: see WORMWOOD. of sexual activity is much older. Shakespeare
talks of daughters of the game in Troilus and
gallery Cressida 1606 and from the early 17th
play to the gallery act in an exaggerated or century gamester was a term used to describe
histrionic manner, especially in order to a lewd person. 
appeal to popular taste. 
the only game in town the best or most
From the mid 17th century the highest important of its kind; the only thing worth
seating in a theatre was called the gallery, concerning yourself with, informal
and it was here that the cheapest seats—and 1998 Spectator But there is... a sense of
the least refined members of the audience— resentment that the big set-piece political
were to be found. This figurative expression interviews are not now the only game in
dates from the late 19th century. 
town. gamut 120
play games deal with someone or something 1987 Washington Times The computer rule
in a way that lacks due seriousness or garbage in, garbage out applies to the human
respect or deviates from the truth. mind just as much as it does to the computer. 
2000 Mike Gayle Turning Thirty couldn t
stand him at first. have a conversation garden
with him and would come away feeling like everything in the garden is lovely or rosy
he was playing games with me. all is well, informal
play someone game advance another Everything in the garden is lovely was an !
plans, whether intentionally or not. ! early 20th-century catchphrase, originating
play the game behave in a fair or honourable in a song popularized by the English music way; abide by the rules or conventions. ! hall artiste Marie Lloyd 1870-1922, and is
used as an expression of general satisfaction 1993 Andy McNab Bravo Two Zero Shorncliffe and contentment. 
was a nightmare, but learned to play
the game. had to—there was nothing else lead someone up the garden path give
for me. 
someone misleading clues or signals. two can play at that game: see TWO. informal
what your or the game? what going
on?; what are you up to? informal The earliest early 20th-century examples of this phrase use just garden rather than
garden path, which suggeststhatthe original gamut context was of someone enticing a person
run the gamut experience, display, or they wanted to seduce or flirt with out into a perform the complete range of something. garden. A North American variant of the
phrase is lead someone down the garden
Gamut is a contraction of medieval Latin path. 
gamma ut, gamma being the lowest note in the medieval musical scale and ut the first
of the six notes forming a hexachord. Garnet
Together, therefore, they represent the full all Sir Garnet highly satisfactory, informal, dated
range of notes of which a voice or an
instrument is capable. Sir Garnet Wolseley 1833-1913, leader
of several successful military expeditions, was ;
1996 Europe: Rough Guide Russia hotels run associated with major reforms in the army. He
the gamut from opulent citadels run as joint- was the model for the modern Major ventures with foreign firms to seedy pits General in Gilbert and Sullivan The Pirates 
inhabited by mobsters. of Penzance. gangbusters gas
go gangbusters proceed very vigorously or all gas and gaiters a satisfactory state of
successfully. North American informalaffairs, informal, dated
Literally, a gangbuster is a person who This expression was first recorded in
assists in the vigorous or violent break-up of Charles Dickens NicholasNickleby 0839: All 
criminal gangs , from which the more general is gas and gaiters. 
sense of a successful person has developed. 
The phrase like gangbusters means 1961 P. G. Wodehouse Ice in the Bedroom She
vigorously and successfully. cries Oh, Freddie darling! and flings herself
into his arms, and all is gas and gaiters again. 1994 Wall Street Journal Sotheby glamorous
semi-annual black tie auction of contem- run out of gas run out of energy; lose
porary art was going gangbusters. m. North American informal
step on the gas press on the accelerator to
garbage make a car go faster. North American informal
garbage in, garbage out incorrect or poor
quality input inevitably produces faultygasket
output. blow a gasket suffer a leak in a gasket of
an engine, lose your temper, informalO This expression is often abbreviated as
GIGO. The phrase originated in the mid 20th gasp
century in the field of computing, but it can your or the last gasp the point of death,
now have a more general application. exhaustion, or completion. 121 get
1996 Will Hutton The State We re In The failure A genie or jinnee in Arabian stories is a
of the 1994 rail strike was the last gasp of an spirit that can adopt various forms and take a
old order. mischievous or benign hand in human affairs. 
The genie generally inhabits a lamp compare
gate with Aladdin lamp at ALADDIN or bottle
from which someone can release it by the
get or be given the gate be dismissed f m
appropriatewordsoractions. The Arabic word
a job. North American informal
appears in English in various transliterations;
genie derives from French génie from Latin
gatepost genius meaning a tutelary spirit , used by
between you and me and the gatepost: see the French translators of The Arabian Nights
between you and me and the bedpost at because it was similar in form and sense to the
Arabic word. BEDPOST. 2002 Chicago Tribune Keeping the nuclear
gauntlet genie in the bottle has not been easy. India and
run the gauntlet go through an intimidating Pakistan have both developed nuclear
or dangerous crowd, place, or experience weapons in recent years. in order to reach a goal. 
This phrase alludes to the former military ;
gentleman
practice of punishing a wrongdoer by forcing a gentleman agreement an arrangement
him to run between two lines of men armed or understanding which is based on the
with sticks, who beat him as he passed. trust of both or all parties, rather than
Gaunret here has nothing to do with a glove, being legally binding. 
but is a version of an earlier word gantlope, 1991 Charles Anderson Grain: Entrepreneurs
itself taken from Swedish gatloppe, which There had been a gentleman agreement 
meant lane course. by the Grain Growers not to enter the
markets of Saskatchewan Wheat Pool  
throw or take up the gauntlet issue predecessor. 
or accept a challenge. 
the little gentleman in the velvet coat the
In medieval times, a person issued a mole, humorous
challenge by throwing their gauntlet i. 
glove to the ground; whoever picked it up This expression was a toast used by the
was deemed to have accepted the challenge, acobites, supporters of the deposed James II !
and his descendants in their claim to the
British throne. It referred to the belief that
the death of King William III resulted from
gear complications following a fall from his horse
change gear begin to move or act differently, when it stumbled over a molehill. The phrase
usually more rapidly. is found in various other forms, including the
This expression derives from literally wee gentleman in black velvet. 
engaging a different gear of a motor vehicle ;
in order to alter its speed. Compare with in
gear with a gear engaged, and so ready for genuine
action and its opposite out of gear. To the genuine article a person or thing
move up a gear means literally change to a considered to be an authentic and
higher gear ; the phrase is often used excellent example of their kind. 
figuratively to mean put more effort into an
activity. George
give someone the gears harass or pester let George do it let someone else do the work
someone. Canadian or take the responsibility. 
1989 Guy Vanderhaeghe Homesick
Whenever Daniel gave him the gears about
overdressing, the old man grew sulky andget
grouchy. as — as all get out to a great or extreme
extent. North American informal
genie 1990 M. Scott Peck A Bed by the Window Shecould be as huffy as all get out. 
let the genie out of or put the genie back in
the bottle let loose or bring back under be out to get someone be determined to
control an unpredictable force, course of punish or harm someone. 
events, etc. don get mad, get even used to advise in
ghost 122
favour of revenge rather than fruitless the gift of tongues: see TONGUE. 
rage, informal God own gift to —: see GOD. 
This expression was a saying popularized j in the gift of of a church living or official
by the US president John F. Kennedy, who appointment in the power of someone to
called it that wonderful law of the Bostonaward. 
Irish political jungle. 
look a gift horse in the mouth find fault with
1998 New Scientist The Wellcome Trust doesn what has been given or be ungrateful for an
get mad, it gets even. opportunity. 
get it together get yourself or a situation The Latin version of the proverb don t
organized or under control, informal ! look a gift horse in the mouth noli... equi
get-up-and-go energy, enthusiasm, and dentés inspicere donati was known to St
initiative, informal erome in the early 5th century AD. The 16th- !
century English form was do not look a given 
A mid 19th-century US colloquialism was horse in the mouth. get up and get. 
1998 New Scientist The JAMA paper offers this
get your own back have your revenge; advice to researchers involved in industry retaliate British informal funded studies: At times it may be prudent... 
to look a gift horse in the mouth. 
ghost gildthe ghost in the machine the mind viewed as
gild the lily try to improve what is already
distinct from the body. beautiful or excellent. 
This phrase was coined by the BritishThis phrase adapts lines from
philosopher Gilbert Ryle in The Concept of
Shakespeare King John: To gild refined
Mind 1949 for a viewpoint that he
gold, to paint the lily... Is wasteful and
considered completely misleading. ridiculous excess. 
the ghost walks money is available and
salaries will be paid. gill
This expression has been explained in green about the gills: see GREEN. 
theatrical phrasebooks by the story that anactor playing the ghost of Hamlet father gilt
refused to walk again until the cast take the gilt off the gingerbread make
overdue salaries had been paid. something no longer appealing. 
give up the ghost of a person die. of a Gingerbread was traditionally made in
machine stop working; break down, decorative forms that were then ornamented especially permanently. stop making an with gold leaf. effort; give up hope. 
The English meaning of ghost, the ginger
soul or spirit as the source of life , survives ginger group a highly active faction within a
only in this idiom. party or movement that presses for
stronger action on a particular issue, informal
look as if you have seen a ghost look very
pale and shocked. An old horse dealer trick recorded from
the late 18th century to make a broken not have or stand the ghost of a chance down animal look lively was to insert ginger ;
have no chance at all. into its anus. From this developed the
metaphorical phrase ginger up, meaning
gift make someone or something more lively ; in :
the gift of the gab the ability to speak with the early 20th century the term ginger group 
arose, to refer to a highly active faction in aeloquence and fluency. 
party or movement that presses for stronger
Gab, dating from the late 18th century, action about something. 
was an informal word for conversation or
chatter. In Scotland it was associated with 1970 New Society The appearance of ginger
gab, an early 18th-century dialect variant of groups to fight specific proposals, is not
gob meaning the mouth. necessarily a bad thing—particularly if the
established bodies aren prepared to fight. 123 glove
gingerbread gizzard
take the gilt off the gingerbread: see GILT. stick in your gizzard be a source of great and
continuing annoyance, informal
gird
gird up your loins prepare and strengthen glad
yourself for what is to come. give someone the glad hand offer someone
a warm and hearty, but often insincere,
This expression is of biblical origin, the
idea being that the long, loose garments
greeting or welcome, informal
worn in the ancient Orient had to be hitched in your glad rags in your smartest clothes; in
up to avoid impeding a person movement, formal evening dress, informal
In 1 Kings 18:45-6, we find: And Ahab rode, 1922 B. Hermon-Hodge Up Against It In
and went to Jezreel. And ... Elijah ... girded Nigeria We all turned out in our glad rags to
up his loins, and ran before Ahab to the oin in the procession. 
entrance of Jezreel. The phrase was also usedmetaphorically in the New Testament:
Wherefore gird up the loins of your mind, beglassy
sober, and hope to the end for the grace the or just the glassy the most excellent
that is to be brought unto you ... 1 Peter person or thing. Australian informal
1:13. In mid 20th-century surfing slang, a gassy is an extremely smooth wave offering
girl excellent surfing conditions. 
page three girl: see PAGE. gleam
give a gleam or twinkle in someone eye a
give and take mutual concessions and barely formed idea. a child who has not
compromises, exchange of words and yet been conceived, humorous
views. 
give as good as you get respond with glitterall that glitters is not gold the attractive
equal force or vehemence when attacked. 
external appearance of something is not a
give someone or something best: see BEST. reliable indication of its true nature, proverb
give someone furiously to think: see THINK. 
give the game or show away inadvertently gloom
reveal something secret or concealed. doom and gloom: see DOOM. 
give it to someone scold or punish someone. 
glory
informal crowning glory: see CROWNING. 
give me — prefer or admire a specified go to glory die or be destroyed. 
thing. 
in your glory in a state of extreme joy or
1998 BBC Vegetarian Good Food Iceberg lettuce
is a massive Eighties con—give me a round exaltation, informal
lettuce any day. give or take — to within — used to express glove
the degree or accuracy of a figure, informal fit like a glove of clothes fit exactly. 
1991 Biyi Bandele-Thomas The Man who Came 1989 T. M. Albert Tales of an Ulster Detective
infromthe Back of Beyond Aged twenty-five give McNinch invited him to try the shoe on
or take a few years, he spoke in a detached his foot, which he did—and it fitted him
voice, like a judge passing the death sentence. like a glove. 
give up the ghost: see GHOST. the gloves are off or with the gloves off or
give someone what for punish or scold take the gloves off used to express the
someone severely. British informal notion that something will be done in an
give yourself airs: see AIR. uncompromising or brutal way, without
not give a damn or hoot not care at all. compunction or hesitation. 
informal The contrast implied in this phrase is with 1998 Penelope Lively Spiderweb The boys knew a gloved hand handling things gently or in a !
that the teachers didn like them and they civilized way. 
didn give a damn. glutton 124
go down with all guns firing fail or be
glutton beaten, but continue to offer resistancea glutton for punishment a person who is
always eager to undertake hard or until the end. 
unpleasant tasks. go figure said to express the speaker belief
that something is inexplicable. NorthO Glutton of— was used figuratively from
the early 18th century for someoneAmerican informal
inordinately fond of the thing specified,
1999 Massive In the last election, the Tories
especially when translating the Latin phrase got 19 per cent of the votes in Scotland
helluo librorum a glutton of books. The and have no MPs there at all, while the Lib
possible origin of the present phrase is in Dems got 13 per cent and have 10 MPs. Go
early 19th-century sporting slang. figure. 
go great guns: see GUN. go halves or shares share somethinggnash equally. 
gnash your teeth feel or express anger or
fury. go to it act in a vigorous, energetic, ordissipated way. British informal
The gnashing of teeth, along with 1995 Times While there is time, become
weeping or wailing, is used throughout the an activist, disrupt political meetings. Go
Bible to express a mixture of remorse and toit. 
rage for example, in Matthew 8:12: But the children of the kingdom shall be cast out into go postal: see POSTAL. 
outer darkness: there shall be weeping and go the way of all flesh: see FLESH. 
gnashing of teeth. go the whole hog: see HOG. 
1998 Times Prepare yourself for the usual go well used to express good wishes to
wailing and gnashing of teeth after someone leaving. South African
tomorrow retail price index figures. 
have a go make an attempt; act
resourcefully take independent or
gnat single-handed action against a criminal or
strain at a gnat: see STRAIN. criminals. have a go at attack or criticize someone. gnome
chiefly Britishgnomes of Zurich Swiss financiers or
bankers, regarded as having sinister make a go of be successful in something. 
influence, derogatory informal

This phrase stems from a remark made by An Australian and New Zealand variant of the British politician Harold Wilson in a this expression is make a do of it, which dates 
speech in 1956: all the little gnomes in from the early 20th century. 
Zurich... about whom we keep on hearing. 1987 Evelyn Smith Miss Melville Returns He d
been unable to make a go of life in the city, and
so he returned to the small New Englandgo village he came from. 
all systems go: see SYSTEM. 
on the go very active or busy, informal
be all go be very busy or active, informal to go of food or drink from a restaurant or
from go to whoa from start to finish. cafe to be eaten or drunk off the premises. 
from the word go from the very beginning. North American
informal. 1997 Bridget Connor Tell Her You Love Her Mrgoal
Parker was in love with me almost from the score an own goal Qin football score a
word go. goal by mistake against your own side. 
go ape: see APE do something that has the unintended
go-as-you-please untrammelled or free. effect of harming your own interests. 
1998 Canal Boat and Inland Waterways Enjoy a informal
go-as-you-please cruise aboard one of our all 0 1 9 1 Brian MacArthur Despatches from the
weather self drive luxury day boats. Gulf War Television mission to explain was
taken to its outer limit and at times scored an
go ballistic: see BALLISTIC. own goal by developing a bias against
go bananas: see BANANA. understanding. 
125 goldengoalpost goes
move the goalposts unfairly alter the anything goes there are no rules about
conditions or rules of a procedure during acceptable behaviour or dress. its course. 
This phrase appeared earlier, in the late
1989 Dimensions Many companies have, in 19th century, as everything goes. 
recent years, moved the goalposts so that
those who used to qualify no longer do so. as or so far as it goes bearing in mind its
limitations said when qualifying praise of
goat something. 
get someone goat irritate someone. what goes around comes around the
informai consequences of your actions will have to
1998 Andrea Ashworth Once in a House on Vire It be dealt with eventually, proverb
got his goat when he caught me... with my
nose stuck in a book turned the wrong way up. who goes there? said by a sentry as a
challenge. play or act the giddy goat fool around;
act irresponsibly, informal going
going, going, gone! an auctioneer  
God traditional announcement that bidding is
God acre a churchyard, archaic closing or closed, and that this is the last
chance to have something, informal
This phrase comes from the German word Gottesacker meaning God seed field ingoing on — or going on for— approaching
which the bodies of the dead are sown. a specified time, age, or amount, humorous
1994 Janice Galloway Foreign Parts Cassie,
God own gift to — the ideal or best carrying this bloody windsurfing board
possible person or thing for someone or through customs. Thirty-one going on
something used chiefly ironically or in fifteen. 
negative statements. have — going for you have a specified factor
1998 Spectator Their the English hooligans, or factors in your favour, informal
their pressmen, hell, even their footballers 1997 Marian Keyes Rachel Holiday All we
behave as if they were God own gift to really had going for us was our hair;
sport. mine was long and dark and hers was long
God willing used to express the wish that you and blonde. 
will be able to do as you intend or that while the going is good while conditions are
something will happen as planned. favourable. 
This is an expression found in many
cultures: compare with Latin deo volente or gold
Arabic inshallah. fool gold: see FOOL. 
go gold of a recording achieve sales
in the lap of the gods: see LAP. 
meriting a gold disc. 
little tin god a self-important person. 
pot or crock of gold a large but distant or
Tin is implicitly contrasted here with illusory reward. 
precious metals. The phrase seems to have
originated in Rudyard Kipling Plain Tales This expression alludes to the traditional from the Hills, where he described idols that story that a pot of gold is to be found by
he thought were given undeserved anyone who succeeds in reaching the end of a veneration: Pleasant it is for the Little Tin rainbow. 
Gods When great Jove nods; But Little Tin
Gods make their little mistakes In missing the worth your weight in gold: see WEIGHT. 
hour when great Jove wakes. gold dust
1987 Fannie Flagg Fried Green Tomatoes at the
Whistle Stop Cafe This little tin God in the like gold dust very valuable and rare. 
polyester suit and the three-pound shoes. So
smug, so self-important, with the nurses golden
fluttering around him like geisha girls. a golden age a period in the past when
play God behave as if all-powerful or things were at their best, happiest, or most
supremely important. successful. gone 126
According to Greek and Roman 1997 Cosmopolitan If you are famous, you
mythology, the Golden Age was the earliest can allow someone to diss you without
and best age of the world, when human retaliating—it as good as admitting they re
beings lived in a state of perfect happiness. more important than you. 
The Ages of Silver, Brass, and Iron as good as gold extremely well-behaved. 
represented successive stages of a descent
into barbarism and misery. as good as new in a very good condition or
state, especially close to the original state
a golden calf something, especially wealth, after damage, injury, or illness. 
as an object of excessive or unworthy be good news: see NEWS. 
worship. be in good company: see COMPANY. 
In the Bible, the golden calf was a statue be — to the good have a specified amount of
of gold in the shape of a calf, made by Aaron ; profit or advantage. 
in response to the Israelites plea for a god 1992 Guardian By then Sheffield were a goal to
while they awaited Moses return fromthe good. : Mount Sinai, where he was receiving the
Ten Commandments Exodus, chapter 32. come up with or deliver the goods do
what is expected or required of you. 
a golden handshake a sum of money paid by informalan employer to a retiring or redundant
get or have the goods on someone obtain
employee. 
or possess information about a person
On the same principle, the phrase a which may be used to their detriment. 
golden hello was coined in the late 20th informal
century. It is explained in an Appointments
section of the New Scientist in 1998: good and — used as an intensifier before an
Employers... especially in the financial adjective or adverb, informal
sector, are offering "golden hell 8 Barbara Kingsolver The Poisonwood Bible
are advances of up to £2000, sometimes given As soon as had her good and terrified slip
on acceptance of a job offer or with the first away. 
month salary. good oil reliable information. Australianinformal
the golden mean the avoidance of extremes. 
This expression has behind it the image of : This phrase translates the Latin phrase oil that is used to lubricate a machine and so ! aurea mediocritas, which comes from the ensure that it runs well. 
Roman poet Horace Odes. 
good Samaritan: see SAMARITAN. 
the golden section the division of a line so have a good mind to do something: see
that the whole is to the greater part as that MIND. 
part is to the smaller part. 
in good time with no risk of being late. 
This is a mathematical term for a in due course but without haste. 
proportion known since the 4th century and mentioned in the works of the Greek in someone good books: see in someone  
mathematician Euclid. It has been called by bad books at BOOK. 
several names, but the mid 19th-century make good be successful. 
German one goldene Schnitt, translating no good to gundy no good at all. Australian
Latin sectio aurea, has given rise to the
current English term. informal
1955 Nina Pulliam Traveled a Lonely Land Just
cards and races and booze—andfightin. Nogone good to Gundy!
gone with the wind: see WIND. one good turn deserves another: see TURN. 
gong take something in good part not be
kick the gong around: see KICK. offended by something. 
up to no good doing or intending to do
good something wrong, informal
all to the good to be welcomed without 1997 lain Sinclair Lights Out for the Territory
qualification. Here we are then, he said, two boyos from
the valleys up to no good in the big, wicked
as good as — very nearly —. city. 
127 graingoog gospel
full as a goog very drunk. Australian informal gospel truth the absolute truth, informal
1998 Mirror Any research that puts down men
Goog is slang for egg , but its origins are is accepted as gospel truth these days. uncertain. 
Gotham
a wise man of Gotham: see WISE. goose
all someone geese are swans someone gourd
habitually exaggerates the merits of out of your gourd out of your mind; crazy,
undistinguished people or things. under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
The goose is proverbially contrasted North American informal
with the swan as being the clumsier, 01988 Jay Mclnerney The Story of My Life After
less elegant, and less distinguished bird; ten minutes bored out of my gourd. 
compare with turn geese into swans 1993 Stephen King Gerald Game was on
below. medication this is the technical hospital term
for stoned out of one gourd. 
cook someone goose: see COOK. 
kill the goose that lays the golden eggs grab
destroy a reliable and valuable source of up for grabs available; obtainable, informal
income. This phrase was originally mid 20th 0 of Aesop fables tells the tale of a century US slang, relating especially to a
man who owned a miraculous goose that laid woman who is open to sexual advances. 
eggs of gold. However, he grew dissatisfiedwith its production of just one egg a day and killed it in the deluded expectation of findinggrace
a large quantity of gold inside it. be in someone good or bad graces be
1999 New York Times Change is needed in the regarded by someone with favour or
nation drug policies... But we need to disfavour. 
address the problem carefully in a way fall from grace fall into a state of sin. fall
that doesn kill the goose that lays the from favour. 
golden egg. 01998 Martin Booth The Industry of Souls He
turn geese into swans exaggerate the merits was an officer in the local militia before he
of people. arrested a young official... for corruption and
fell from grace. what sauce for the goose is sauce for the
gander: see SAUCE. 
with good or bad grace in a willing and
happy or resentful and reluctant manner. 
Gordian grade
cut the Gordian knot: see CUT. make the grade succeed; reach the desired
standard, informalgorge
cast the gorge at reject with loathing, dated grain
your gorge rises you are sickened or against the grain contrary to the natural
disgusted. inclination or feeling of someone or
something. : Gorge is an obsolete term from falconry, meaning a meal for a hawk ; from this phrase alludes to the fact that wood derives the more general sense of the iseasiertocutalongthelineofthegrainthan contents of the stomach. across or against it. 

a grain of mustard seed a small thinggory capable of vast development. 
the gory details the explicit details of
something. Black mustard seed grows to a great
height. In Matthew 13:31-2 it is stated that
1988 David Carpenter God Bedfellows She
mustard seed... indeed is the least of all
starts telling me some of the gory details... it
seeds: but when it is grown, it is the greatest was cancer... and everybody knew he was among herbs. 
dying. grand 128grand voter; among the rank andfileof a political
party. a or the grand old man of a man long and
highly respected in a particular field. the grass is always greener other people  
lives or situations always seem better than
Recorded from 1882, and popularly your own. abbreviated as GOM, Grand Old Man was the nickname of the British statesman William This is a shortened form of the proverb
Ewart Gladstone 1809-98, who went on to the grass is always greener on the other side
win his last election in 1892 at the age of ofthefence , usually used as a caution against
eighty-three. dissatisfaction with your own lot in life. There !
area number of sayings about the attractions of something distant or inaccessible, for
grandeur example blue are the faraway hills. 
delusions of grandeur: see DELUSION. not let the grass grow under your feet
grandmother not delay in acting or taking an
teach your grandmother to suck eggs opportunity. 
presume to advise a more experienced put someone or something out to grass
person. put an animal out to graze, forcesomeone to retire; make someone
The proverb you can teach your grandmother to suck eggs has been used
redundant, informalsince the early 18th century as a caution
against any attempt by the ignorant or grasshopper
inexperienced to instruct someone wiser or knee-high to a grasshopper: see KNEE more knowledgeable. HIGH. grape grave
sour grapes: see SOUR. dig your own grave: see DIG. 
have one foot in the grave: see FOOT. 
grapevine silent or quiet as the grave very quiet. 
hear something on the grapevine acquiretake the oryour etc. secret to the grave die
information by rumour or by unofficial
communication. without revealing a secret. 
turn or turn over in their grave used to
This phrase comes originally from an
American Civil War expression, when news express the opinion that something would
was said to be passed by grapevine have caused anger or distress in someone
telegraph. Compare with bush telegraph who is now dead. 
at TELEGRAPH. 1998 Spectator There was a lot of buzz at
effKoons studio... But the grinding noise
one heard was Peter Fuller turning in hisgrasp grave. 
grasp at straws: see clutch at straws at STRAW. graven
grasp the nettle tackle a difficulty boldly. a graven image a carved representation of a
Britishgod used as an object of worship. This expression refers to a belief recorded ;
from the late 16th century onwards This expression is from the second of the enshrined in a rhyme quoted in Sean Ten Commandments: Thou shalt not make
0 Casey s7i7noancthePaycocc1925: lfyou unto thee any graven image Exodus 20:4. 
gently touch a nettle it ll sting you for your
pains; grasp it like a lad of mettle, an as soft as silk remains. gravy
1998 New Scientist The problem was that board the gravy train obtain access to an
governments failed to grasp the nettle and easy source offinancialgain, informal
scrap the system. Gravy is an informal term for money
easily acquired and gravy train is perhaps an alteration of gravy boat, a long, narrow jug
grass used for serving gravy. 
at the grass roots at the level of the ordinary
129 greyThis proverb refers to the Trojan priest
grease Laocoon warning in Virgil Aeneid: timeo
grease or oil someone palm bribe Danaos et dona ferentes , in which he warns
someone, informal his countrymen against taking into their city
the gigantic wooden horse that the Greeks
This phrase comes from the practice ofhave left behind on their apparent
applying grease to a machine to make it run jdeparture. The fall of Troy results from their
smoothly. The same expression exists infailure to heed this warning. 
French as graisser la patte. The form with
palm is now predominant but hand appears in the earliest recorded versions of the idiom, dating from the 16th century. green
green about or around or at the gills
1998 Economist Licences to run a shop in
Italy ... have caused many an official palm to looking or feeling ill or nauseous. 
be greased. informal
grease the wheels make things go smoothly, A person gills are the fleshy parts
especially by paying the expenses. between the jaw and the ears: this sense of
the word dates from the early 17th century,
Other colours are occasionally used to
greased indicate a sickly appearance; much less
like greased lightning: see like lightning at common is rosy about the gills indicating
LIGHTNING. good health. 
greasy green light permission to go ahead with a
greasy spoon a cheap, run-down restaurant project. 
or cafe serving fried foods. 
The green light referred to is the traffic
1968 Len Deighton Only When Larf Bob said he ; signal indicating that traffic is free to
was hungry and wanted to pull up at every move forward. Red and green lights were
greasy spoon we passed. in use from the late 19th century in railway
signals, but this figurative use of green
great light appears to date from the mid 20ththe great and the good distinguished and century. 
worthy people collectively, often ironic
1997 New Scientist Zemin even got the green
1998 New Scientist But last year, an ad hoc light to buy nuclear power plants. 
committee of the Internet great and good
unveiled its own plan. green with envy very envious or jealous. 
great and small of all sizes, classes, or types. the green-eyed monster jealousy, literary
1997 Times Education Supplement You are : Green is traditionally the colour of
strongly advised to keep well clear of all ealousy, as shown in the previous idiom
creatures great and small. green with envy and in this one, where the
a great one for a habitua oer of; an green-eyed monster is jealousy personified,
enthusiast for. This expression is a quotation from
1994 Romesh Gunesekera Reef Early on Shakespeare Othello, where lago warns:
O! beware my lord of jealousy; It is the
learned the value of making lists from
green-eyed monster which doth mock The
watching Mister Salgado. He was a great one meat it feeds on. 
for lists. Greek
it all Greek to me can understand it at all. grey
informal a grey area an ill-defined situation or field
not readily conforming to a category or to
Greek meaning unintelligible language an existing set of rules. 
or gibberish is recorded from the 16th
century. In Shakespeare A us Caesar, Casca, In the 1960s, grey areas in British planning having noted that Cicero speaks Greek, adds vocabularyreferredtoplacesthatwerenotin for mine own part, it was Greek to me. as desperate a state as slums but which were in decline and in need of rebuilding. 
beware or fear the Greeks bearing gifts if 2001 Rough Guide to Travel Health In theory,
rivals or enemies show apparent it should be a cinch to diagnose appendicitis,
generosity or kindness, you should be but in practice it much more of a grey
suspicious of their motives, proverb area. grief 130
grief move more and more slowly and thencome to grief have an accident; meet with stop. 
disaster. 1999 Times Traffic is expected to grind to a halt
2000 R. W. Holden Taunton Cider & Langdons throughout the West Country as up to a
The historian... will see no trace of the million sightseers make the trip. 
battlefield where Charles grandson, the grindstone
Duke of Monmouth, came to grief. 
keep your nose to the grindstone work hard
give someone grief be a nuisance to and continuously. 
someone, informal
1998 Times One of the passengers who been A grindstone was a thick revolving disc
giving the cabin crew grief started yelling, ! of stone on which knives and tools were
We ve had a near miss. ! sharpened. Appearing in various forms
since the mid 16th century, this idiom
grig originally referred to getting mastery over
someone else by forcing them to work
merry or lively as a grig full of fun; without a break. extravagantly lively. 
The meaning and origin of the word grig
are unknown. Samuel Johnson conjectured in
grip
his Dictionary that it referred to anything come or get to grips with Qengage in
below the natural size. A sense that physical combat with. begin to deal with
fits in with the lively version of this idiom is a or understand. 
young or small eel in fresh water. The get a grip keep or recover your self-control. 
phrases merry grig and merry Greek, 2000 Jo-Ann Goodwin Danny Boy took a deep
meaning a lively, playful person , were both breath, trying desperately to get a grip, to hold
in use in the mid 16th century, but it is
myself together. impossible to establish the precise
relationship between them or to be certain gristwhich may be an alteration of the other. 
grist to the mill experience, material, or
knowledge which can be turned to goodgrim use. 
like or for grim death with intense
Grist in the sense of corn that is to be
determination. ground is now used only in this phrase and in 1989 Jonathan Gash Jade Woman Here and the proverb all is grist that comes to the mill. 
there a greenish scumble of vegetation hung The word is related to Old Saxon gristgrimmo 
on for grim death. meaning gnashing of teeth. 
the Grim Reaper a personification of death in
the form of a cloaked skeleton wielding a
large scythe. grit
true grit strength of character; stamina. 
grin informal
grin and bear it suffer pain or misfortune in a Grit in this colloquial sense originated in
stoical manner. early 19th-century US English. 
The usual modern sense of grin is less
sinister than its earliest senses: when it Grody
entered the language it primarily meant an ;
act of showing the teeth or a snarl. From the Grody to the max unspeakably awful. US
mid 17th century to the mid 18th century, a informal
grin was generally used in a derogatory way ;
Grody is probably an alteration of
or in unfavourable contrast to a cheerful
grotesque and to the max of to the maximum jsmile. The sense of grin in grin and bear it
point. 
retains the earlier associations with showing
your teeth in a grimace of pain oranger. Grin 
and abide is recorded as a proverb in the late
18th century; the modern version dates from groove
the late 19th century. in or into the groove performing well or
confidently, especially in an established
pattern. indulging in relaxed andgrind spontaneous enjoyment, especially
grind to a halt or come to a grinding halt dancing, informal
131 guestO A groove is the spiral track cut in a
gramophone record that forms the path forgrove
the needle. In the groove is first found in the groves of Academe the academic
mid 20th century, in the context of jazz, and it community, literary
gave rise to the adjective groovy, which
This phrase alludes to the Roman poet
initially meant playing or able to play jazz or Horace Epistles, in which he says: Atque
similar music well. inter silvas Academi quaerere verum and
seek for truth in the groves of Academe. The
Academia was a grove near ancient Athens
gross where a number of philosophers, Plato
by the gross in large numbers or amounts. among them, taught their pupils. 
A gross was formerly widely used as a unit of quantity equal to twelve dozen; the word !
comes from the French gross douzaine, which grow
literally means large dozen. grow on trees be plentiful or easily obtained. 
1996 Nozipo Maraire Zenzele Childrenthese days think that money grows on
ground trees!break new or fresh ground do something
innovative which is considered an advanceor positive benefit. guard
lower or drop or let down your guard
Literally, to break new ground is to do relax your defensive posture, leaving
preparatory digging or other work prior to yourself vulnerable to attack, reduce
building or planting something. In North
your level of vigilance or caution. America the idiom is break ground. 
T   a expression connected in its
cut the ground from under someone feet literal sense with boxing, as is its opposite
do something which leaves someone raise your guard meaning adopt a defensive without a reason or justification for their posture. actions or opinions, informal
get in on the ground floor become part ofan enterprise in its early stages, informal guernsey
get a guernsey be selected for a football
get off the ground or get something off
team, gain recognition or approbation. 
the ground start or cause to start Australian informal
happening or functioning successfully. 
& guernsey is a type of knitted shirt or
go to ground Qof a fox or other animal sweater; in Australia the word is specifically
enter its earth or burrow to hide, especially applied to a football shirt. 
when being hunted. of a person hide or
become inaccessible, usually for a
prolonged period. guess
have your feet on the ground: see FOOT. anybody guess a totally unpredictable
on the ground in a place where real, matter, informal
practical work is done. 1999 Jason Elliot An Unexpected Light The most
likely scenario was a government alliance
on your own ground on your own territory with the forces of the north, although it was
or concerning your own range of anyone guess how long such a Faustian pact
knowledge or experience. might last. by guess and by God without specific
prepare the ground make it easier for guidance or direction. 
something to occur or be developed. This expression was originally used in a
run someone or something to ground: see nautical context, where it meant to steer
run someone or something to earth at blind, without the guidance of landmarks,
RUN. The alternative by guess and by Godfrey is
thick or thin on the ground existing or not also sometimes found. 
existing in large numbers or amounts. work or run yourself into the ground guest
exhaust yourself by working or running be my guest please do. informal
very hard, informalgullet 132
1988 Jay Mclnerney The Story of My Life ll hurt top gun a or the most important person. 
myself, Mannie screams. Be my guest, says
Rebecca. under the gun under great pressure. NorthAmerican informal
gullet with all guns blazing with great
stick in your gullet: see stick in your throat determination and energy, often without
at THROAT. thought for the consequences, informal
gum tree gut
up a gum tree in or into a predicament. —your guts out perform a specified action as
informal hard or as fully as possible, informal
2000 Anthony Bourdain Kitchen Confidential
This phrase is now found mainly in British He ll take them out, get them liquored up so
English, but the phrase is recorded in the ithey blab their guts out, and ll have a full
early 19th century in the USA, where
possum up a gum tree was the title of a song ireport by noon next. 
or dance. hate someone guts feel a strong hatred for
someone, informal1992 Economist If they should end up
seeking a deal with the Unionists, offers of have someone guts for garters punish or
devolution will lead ministers straight up a rebuke someone severely, informal
gum tree. gun gutser
come a gutser suffer a failure or defeat. a big gun: see a big cheese at BIG. 
informal
blow great guns be very windy, informal
Gutser also spelled gutzer is explained in go down with all guns firing: see GO. 
Fraser and Gibbons Soldier and Sailor Words go great guns perform forcefully, 1925 as pre-war slang, and an old term
vigorously, or successfully, informal among Scottish boys for falling flat on the
1 1 3 Field A moment later Louvois shot water in diving, instead of making a clean
out, passed Sanquhar and Fairy King, and header. In air-force slang come or fetch a
going great guns... beat the favourite by a gutser meant crash. 
head. 
jump the gun: see JUMP. smoking gun: see SMOKING. gypgive someone gyp cause pain or severe
stick to your guns refuse to compromise or discomfort to someone. British informal
change, despite criticism, informal Gyp may be a dialect contraction of
gee-up, a word of command used to urge a
The image here is of a soldier maintaining horse to move faster, the connection being
his position under enemy fire. 
that, in this phrase, whatever is giving
1998 New Scientist Researchers have bravely someone gyp is preventing them from resting
stuck to their guns as they went about seeking or taking things easy. public funds. HhS
habit a ma
k small and overfine
kick the habit: see K K. 1 ! . :
This expression was first recorded in the
hacklCS ! latel 7th century. Split straws, dating from
make someone hackles rise make someone angry or indignant. 
Hackles are the long feathers on the neck half
dog neck, which are raised when the animal
kind specified, informal
1998 Sarah Waters Tipping the Velvet Thehai aughter must be a beauty and a half... if the
mothe is a 0 k a f a e
hail-fellow-well-met showing excessive fr § 
fe
... away from young men eyes. 
at
World Harold was accustomed to hail-fellow- informal
well-met salesmen and deferential secretaries ;" " "" " "" " ;
: f At half cock is used of a firearm with the :
and even irate accountants.
cock lifted but not moved to the position at
which thetriggerwillact. lt is usually found in haïr go off at half cock or go off half-cocked
hair of the dog a small quantity of meaning go ahead without making proper alcohol taken as a remedy for a hangover. L. P     a : 
M half the battle: see BATTLE. 
The full form of this phrase is hair of the half a chance the slightest opportunity. 
dog that bit you. Hair from a rabid dog was at informal
one time thought to be a remedy against the 197Q Njna Bawden mds Tng$ Giye

effects of its bite; this expression, the half a a œ a she a k think
recommended cure for a hangover is a small : black white
amount of the cause of the problem. half an : see 
19
ul B UCe A»en Powe The Ice Eaters Murray, haf a oaf a a wantbutbetter
still feeling the effects of the previous evening . 
had suggested they go into a bar because he
needed a hair of the dog.
hair annoying or loaf is better than no bread, which has been ceasing to annoy someone, informal in use since the mid 16th century. 
keep your hair on! used to urge someone not the ha,f "of"jt mos t
important part or
to panic or lose their temper. British informal aspect of something. 
informa
let your hair down behave wildly or 1 8 7 G g Sea & summer
uninhibitedly. informal Mum... would ask, But is this true? and
make someone hair stand on end alarm or Billy... would tell her that wasn the half of it. 
horrify someone. have a mind to do something: see MIND. 
neither hide nor hair of: see HIDE. how the other half lives: see OTHER HALF. 
not turn a hair remain apparently unmoved not do things by halves do things
or unaffected. thoroughly or extravagantly. 
put hair or hairs on your chest of not half not nearly as. not at all. informal
halfway 134
too — by half used to emphasize something A US variant of this phrase is all hands and 
bad. British the cook, meaning absolutely everyone
1994 Independent on Sunday The idea that available , since the cook would not
moving a few pot plants around a room can normally be expected to do the work of other
bring its occupant prosperity and well- team members except in cases of dire
being ... seems too superstitious by half. emergency. All hands on deck or all hands to 
the pumps, in addition to their literal
your better half: see BETTER. shipboard senses, are also used to indicate
that all members of a team are required to be
halfway involved. 
a halfway house a compromise, the
halfway point in a progression. a place be a dab hand at: see DAB. 
where ex-prisoners, mental patients, etc. bind ortie someone hand and foot
can stay while they become reaccustomed severely restrict someone freedom to act
to normal life. or make decisions. 
l the late 18th century, a halfway house 
do something with one hand tied behind
was an inn or other establishment halfway your back do something easily. 
between two places or at the midpoint of a get or keep your hand in become or
ourney. remain practised in something. 
get your hands dirty: see DIRTY. 
Hamlet give or lend a hand assist in an action or
Hamlet without the prince a performance or enterprise. 
event taking place without the principal give someone the glad hand: see GLAD. 
actor. hand in glove in close collusion or
The phrase comes from an account given : association. 
in the Morning Post of September 1775. The member of a theatrical company who was to This phrase appeared earlier in the late
play Hamlet in a production of Shakespeare 17th century as hand and glove; the current play ran off with an innkeeper daughter form gained ground from the late 18th
before the performance; when the play was century. 
announced to the audience, they were told
the part of Hamlet was to be left out, for a hand turn a stroke of work, informal
that night. 1982 Rodney Hall Just Relations Rich was she?
A wallowing pig in jewels and wicked money
she never did a hand turn to earn for herself?
hammer from hand to mouth satisfying only your
come or go under the hammer be sold at an immediate needs because of lack of money
auction. for future plans and investments. 
1960 Lynne Reid Banks The L-Shaped Room m
hammer something home: see drive
twenty-eight years old and still living from
something home at HOME. hand to mouth like a bloody tramp. 
hammer and tongs with great energy and hands down especially of winning easily
noise. and decisively. 
The image here is of a blacksmith striking the hot iron removed from the forge with a Originally a horse-racing expression, win pair of tongs. hands down meant that a jockey was so
certain of victory in the closing stages of a
1996 Emma Lathen Brewing Up a Storm The big race that he could lower his hands, thereby
fight she had with Sean Cushing. They were relaxing his hold on the reins and ceasing to going at it hammer and tongs. urge on his horse. 
hammering hands off! used to warn someone against
take a hammering be subjected to touching or interfering with something. 
harsh treatment, be heavily defeated. have your hand in the till: see have your
informal fingers in the till at TILL. make or lose or spend money hand over
hand fist make or lose or spend money very
all hands the entire crew of a ship. rapidly, informal
135 hangO This phrase first appeared in the mid 18th handshake
century as hand over hand. Found in nauticalgolden handshake: see GOLDEN. 
contexts, it referred to the movement of a
person hands when rapidly climbing a rope handsome
or hauling it in. By the mid 19th century, hand
over hand was being used to mean handsome is as handsome does character
advancing continuously and rapidly , and behaviour are more important than
especially of one ship pursuing another, good looks, proverb
Hand over fist is first recorded in the early
19th century, also in a nautical context, but it In this particular form the proverb dates
was soon used more generally to indicate from the mid 17th century. When used of
speed, especially in the handling of money. behaviour, handsome really means
chivalrous or genteel , though inthissaying 1991 Simon Winchester Pacific Japan it is taken to refer to good looks. The original continued making money hand overfist,the sense is made clear in the earlier version:
American trade deficit became steadily larger goodly is he that goodly dooth. 
and larger. 
on or off someone hands having or not hang
having to be dealt with or looked after by get the hang of something learn how to
the person specified. operate or do something, informal
put your hands together applaud. 1990 Roddy Doyle The Snapper He was
pretending to time them... because he
put your hands up raise your hands in couldn get the hang of the stop-watch
surrender or to signify assent or Bertie got him. 
participation. hang by a thread: see THREAD. 
the right hand doesn know what the left
hang fire delay or be delayed in taking action
hand doing there is a state of confusion
or progressing. or a failure of communication within a
group or organization. In the late 18th century, hang fVe was
set or put your hand to start work on. used to refer to the action of a firearm that
was slow in communicating the fire through A fuller version of this phrase is set your the vent to the charge and so did not go off hand to the plough, which alludes to Luke immediately. 
9:62: No man, having put his hand to the
plough, and looking back, is fit for the hang a left or right make a left or right
kingdom of God. turn. US informal
sit on your hands: see SIT. hang loose: see 
take a hand in become influential in hang of a — or a hang of to a g h
determining something; intervene. degree; great. South African informal
1988 Shetland Times The amenity trust is also In this expression hang is probably being taking a hand in restoring two old gravestones used as a euphemism for hell. 
in the Ollaberry kirkyard. 1945 Frank Sargeson When the Wind Blows All
turn your hand to something undertake an this was because Charlie was hang of a funny
activity different from your usual to be with. 
occupation. 
1994 Barbara Anderson All the Nice Girls hang someone out to dry leave someone in a
Win had always told him he was an able man, difficult or vulnerable situation, informal
afixer,one who could turn his hand to The image here is of hanging wet
anything. washing on a clothes line to dry. The idea of !
wait on someone hand and foot attend flapping uselessly or ineffectually like
to all of someone needs or requests, clothes drying in the wind is also behind the :
cricketing metaphor hanging your bat out to 
especially when this is regarded as
dry, which dates from the late 19th century
unreasonable. : and means holding your bat away from your 1955 L. P. Hartley A Perfect Woman He has body at an ineffectual angle. 
everything he wants and servants who wait on
him hand and foot. 1998 Spectator We point out that another
MP... has been hung out to dry for failing to
wash your hands of: see WASH. declare what was relative to this a minuscule
with your hand in the cookie jar: see COOKIE. interest. hanging 136
hang tough be or remain inflexible or firmly happy hunting ground a place where
resolved. North American informal success or enjoyment is obtained. 
1992 Randall Kenan Let the Dead Bury their
Dead Obviously, he intended to hang tough This phrase originally referred to the
at first, but apparently Miss Jesse psychic optimistic hope of Native Americans that the !
bullwhip lashed out and snap-crackled his afterlife will be spent in a country where
brain. there are good hunting grounds. 
hang up your boots stop working; retire. 1991 Antique Collector With Old Master
informa rawings still considered an undervaluedgenre, this should prove a happy hunting 
Boots are seen in this expression as part of ground for those in search of a bargain. 
a person working clothes. A common
Canadian variant is hang up your skates. hard
1997 Farmers Weekly The hard fact is that all be hard put to find it very difficult to. 
farmers, whether the pension scheme is 2001 Marc Blake 24 Karat Schmooze He wore an
attractive or not, are, mostly, reluctant to Armani suit with a navy shirt, a club tie
hang their boots up. although the vintners would have been hard
hang your hat be resident. North American put to name the actual club and a Freemasonry
informal pin. 
2001 Kevin Sampson Outlaws End of the day hard as nails Qvery hard, of people
though it ain the Royal and that is where insensitive or callous; without pity. 
want to hang my hat. hard as the nether millstone callous and
let it all hang out be uninhibited or relaxed. unyielding. informal
T nether millstone is the lower of the
not care orgive a hang not care at all. informal two millstones by which corn is ground. The Hang here is a late 19th-century phrase alludes to Job 41:24: His heart is as
euphemism for damn. firm as a stone, and as hard as a piece of the nether millstone. 
hanging hard at it busily working, informal
a hanging offence a fault or crime so serious 1997 Independent leave home... just after
that the perpetrator should be executed. 6am each day and hard at it by 7. 30. 
1998 Spectator It is hardly a hanging offence to a hard case Qa tough or intractable person. 
overlook telegrams about a small African 0 an amusing or eccentric person. Australian
country, but surely the Prime Minister mustread JIC reports? & New Zealand
a hard nut to crack a person or thing that is
difficult to understand or influence, informalhappy
a hard row to hoe: see ROW. 
happy as a sandboy extremely happy;
perfectly contented with your situation. the hard way through suffering or learning
from the unpleasant consequences ofAn 1823 dictionary describes a sandboy as mistakes. 
an urchin who sold sand in the streets, and 1996 Nozipo Maraire Zenzele think she
according to the same source the expression understands better than the rest of us that we
olly as a sandboy was already proverbial by are at heart one family, for she has had to learn
that date for a merry fellow who has tasted a the hard way. 
drop. A common British version of the phrase
play hard to get deliberately adopt an aloof
is happy as Larry, Larry being a pet name for
Lawrence. This saying is sometimes or uninterested attitude, typically in order
connected with the renowned boxer Larry to make yourself more attractive or
Foley 1847-1917; on the other hand, it may interesting, informal
owe something to larry, a dialect word used put the hard word on ask a favour of
by Thomas Hardy, meaning a state of someone, especially a sexual or financial
excitement. The North American version is
favour. Australian & New Zealand informal
happy as a clam, which apparently originated
in the early 19th century on the east coast, 1997 Derek Hansen Sole Survivor But if he d
where clams are plentiful: the full version come to put the hard word on her, why hadn t
happy as a clam at high water explains the he picked a more appropriate time?
source of the clam satisfaction. Midmorning had never struck her as
particularly conducive to romance. 
137 hat
a hard nut: see a tough nut at NUT. ! Rudyard Kipling alludes to such a situation:
The toad beneath the harrow knows Exactly hare where each tooth-point goes. 
mad as a March hare: see mad as a hatter atMAD. Harry
run with the hare and hunt with the hounds play Old Harry with: see play the devil with
try to remain on good terms with both at DEVIL. 
sides in a conflict or dispute. Britishhash
This expression has been in use since the make a hash of make a mess of; bungle. 
mid 15th century. informal
start a hare raise a topic of conversation. Hash comes from the French verb hacher 
British, dated meaning chop up small. A hash is a dish of
cooked meat cut into small pieces and
The rapid twisting and running of a recooked with gravy; from this comes the
hunted hare is here used as a metaphor for derogatory sense of hash meaning a jumble the pursuit of a topic in an animated of incongruous elements; a mess. 
conversation, especially one in which the
participants hold strong views. settle someone hash deal with and subdue
a person very forcefully, informal
harm sling hash: see SLING. 
out of harm way in a safe place. 
1996 Frank McCourt Angela Ashes Take haste
down the Pope and hide him in the coal more haste, less speed you make better
hole... where he won be seen and he ll be progress with a task if you don try to do it
out of harm way. too quickly, proverb
someone or something wouldn harm a fly: The primary meaning of speed in this
see someone or something wouldn hurt proverbial saying was success in the
a fly at FLY. performance of an activity , rather than
there is no harm in — the course of action rapidity of movement , though it is the latter !
specified may not guarantee success but is : that is now generally assumed to be meant. 
at least unlikely to have unwelcomerepercussions. hat
1997 Arundhati Roy The God of Small Thingsbe all hat and no cattle tend to talk
He decided that since she couldn have a boastfully without acting on your words. 
husband there was no harm in her having an
education. US informal
black hat or white hat used in reference to
harness the bad or good party in a situation. 
in harness in the routine of daily work, This idiom refers to the colour of the hats working closely with someone to traditionally worn by the bad or good
achieve something. characters in cowboy films. 

The image is of a horse or other animal keep something under your hat keep
being used for driving or draught work. something a secret. 
pass the hat round collect contributions of
harp money from a number of people for a
harp on the same string dwell tediously on specific purpose. 
one subject. pick something out of a hat select
harrow something, especially the winner of a
under the harrow in distress. contest, at random. 
pull one out of the hat bring off an
A harrow is a heavy frameset with iron
teeth or tines, drawn over ploughed land to unexpected trick in an apparently
break up clods and root up weeds; an animal desperate situation. 
caught under a harrow would suffer extreme The image here is of a rabbit pulled out of : pain. In the poem Pagett, MP 1886, a magician hat. 
hatch 138
1971 James McClure The Steam Pig must say 1998 Barbara Kingsolver The Poisonwood Bible
you ve really pulled one out of the hat this Those glassy museum stares have got nothing
time. on you, my uncaptured favorite child, wild as
take your hat off to state your admiration for the day is long. 
someone who has achieved something. have one too many: see MANY. Britishhavoc
throw your hat in or into the ring indicate play havoc with completely disrupt; cause
willingness to take up a challenge or enter serious damage to. 
a contest. 1989 Vijay Singh In Search of the River Goddess
1998 Times We have been anticipating that hate contractors who come from the plains,
South Africa would throw its hat into the ring chop down trees, play havoc with our lives. 
for some time and have a high regard for the
candidacy. hawkwatch someone like a hawk keep a vigilant
hatch eye on someone, especially to check that
batten down the hatches: see BATTEN. they do nothing wrong. 
hatches, matches, and despatches the
births, marriages, and deaths columns in ahay
newspaper, humorous, dated hit the hay go to bed. informal
under the hatches below deck in a ship. make hay make good use of an opportunity
concealed from public knowledge. while it lasts. 
This is a shortened version of the proverb hatchet make hay while the sun shines, which dates
do a hatchet job on criticize savagely. ! from the mid 16th century. 
haul 1998 Simon Winchester The Surgeon of
Crowthorne The British papers, always eager to
haul someone over the coals: see COAL. vent editorial spleen on their transatlantic
rivals, made hay with this particular aspect of
have the story. 
have had it be in a very poor condition; be make hay of throw into confusion. 
beyond repair or past its best. be
extremely tired. have lost all chance of head
survival, be unable to tolerate someone bang or knock people heads together
or something any longer, informal reprimand people severely, especially in an
have it away on your toes leave quickly. attempt to stop them arguing. 
British informal 1998 Community Care There are few signs yetthat the SEU has been willing to bang
have it away or off with have sexual
government heads together over social
intercourse with. British vulgar slang security policy. 
1998 Oldie Today, young Billy would be having
bang or knock your head against a brick
it off with all three young ladies on a rota basis. 
wal oggedly attempt the impossible and
have it both ways: see BOTH. have your efforts repeatedly and painfully
have got it in for have a particular dislike of rebuffed. 
someone and behave in a hostile manner 1995 Jayne Miller Voxpop You re banging your
towards them, informal head against a brick wall for years and still
have got it in you to do something have getting nowhere. It soul-destroying. 
the capacity or potential to do something. be hanging over your head of something
informal unpleasant threaten to affect you at any
have it out with someone attempt to resolve moment. 
a contentious matter by confronting be on someone own head be someone  
someone and engaging in a frank sole responsibility. discussion or argument, informal
bite or snap someone head off reply
have got nothing on someone orsharply and brusquely to someone. 
something be not nearly as good as
someone or something, especially in a do someone head in cause someone to feel
particular respect. annoyed, confused, or frustrated. Britishinformal139 head
1997 Sunday Telegraph Now psychobabble has keep your head above water avoid
become part of our vocabulary—and it doing succumbing to difficulties, especially
Theodore Dalrymple head in. falling into debt. 
do something standing on your head do keep your head down remain inconspicuous
something very easily. in difficult or dangerous times, informal
get your head down sleep, concentrate 1995 Edward Toman Dancing in Limbo All his
on the task in hand. British informal instincts told him to keep his head down. He
didn need Lily constant nagging to remind
get your head round or around somethinghim he was in deep trouble. 
understand or come to terms withsomething, informal King Charles head: see KING. 
give someone their head allow someone knock someone or something on the head:
complete freedom of action. see KNOCK. 
The image is of allowing a horse to go as make head or tail of understand at all. 
fast as it wants rather than checking its pace 1994 S. P. Somtow Jasmine Nights m... trying
with the bit and reins. Compare with allow to puzzle out why he has turned his animosity
free rein to at REIN. on me instead of those who are clearly his
enemies. can make head or tail of it. 
1994 Charles Grant X-Files: Goblins Rather than need your head examined be foolishly
try to derail him, however, it was better to give irresponsible. 
him his head and go along for the ride. 
go to your head of alcohol make you The implication here is that the
examination will reveal proof of insanity. dizzy or slightly drunk. of success make
you conceited. 1992 Patrick McCabe The Butcher Boy Any man
have your head screwed on: see SCREWED. thinks this work is easy needs his head
examined—you want to be tough to work here !
head and shoulders above by far superior to. 
informal off or out of your head Qmad or crazy. 
1996 Time Out The film stands head and extremely drunk or severely under the
shoulders above 99. per cent of post-70 influence of illega rugs, informal
Hollywood product. off the top of your head without careful
head over heels upside down; turning over thought or investigation, informal
completely in a forward motion, as in a 1988 Jamaica Kincaid A Small Place He
apologises for the incredible mistake he has
somersault. 
made in quoting you a price off the top of his
The earlier, more logical, version of this head which is so vastly different favouring
phrase was heels over head; the normal him from the one listed. 
modern form dates from the late 18thover your head beyond your ability to
century. It is often used figuratively of anextreme condition, as in head over heels in
understand, without your knowledge or
love, madly in love , or head over heels in involvement, especially when you have a
debt, deeply in debt. right to this. with disregard for your own
stronger claim. 
heads win, tails you lose win whatever put your heads together consult and work
happens. together. heads will roll there will be some people
dismissed or disgraced. put something into someone head suggest
1975 Sam Selvon Moses Ascending It appears something to someone. 
he went back for reinforcements, and is stand or turn something on its head
returning to make some drastic changes in the completely reverse the principles or
administration of the Establishment. Heads interpretation of an idea, argument, etc. 
will roll, they say. 
take it into your head to do something
hold or put a gun ora pistol to someone decide impetuously to do something. 
head force someone to do something by 1991 Ben Okri The Famished Road Fearing that
using threats. the supervisor might notice me as well and
keep or lose your head remain or fail to take it into his head to order me to break my
remain calm. neck carrying cement bags, hurried on. 
1990 Time He claims that Quayle rises to the turn heads attract a great deal of attention or
challenge, takes chances but keeps his head. interest. 
headline 140
turn someone head make someone heart of gold a generous nature. 
conceited. heart of oak a courageous nature. 
with your head in the clouds: see CLOUD. 
— your head off laugh, talk, shout, etc. with Literally, the heart is the solid central part of the oak tree traditionally used for timber a complete lack of restraint or without
for ships. The phrase was popularized by the !
stopping. ! words of an 18th-century song: Heart of oak 1990 Paul Auster The Music of Chance Now that are our ships, Heart of oak are our men. 
the kid was out of danger, he began to show
his true colors, and it wasn long before he heart of stone a stern or cruel nature. 
was talking his head off. heart to heart candidly or intimately. 
headline hearts and minds used in reference to
emotional and intellectual support orhit the headlines be written about or given
commitment. attention as news. 1999 New Yorker In the battle between
heap Darwinians and creationists for the hearts and
minds of the uncommitted, it matters
at the top or bottom of the heap of a whether evolution by natural selection is
person at the highest or lowest point of a spiritually suggestive. 
society or organization. 
in your heart of hearts in your innermost
be struck all of a heap be extremely feelings. 
disconcerted, informal my heart bleeds for you: see BLEEDS. 
heap coals of fire on someone head: see take something to heart take something
COAL. seriously; be much affected or upset bysomething. hear
1992 Ian Rankin A Good Hanging Suicidal, just
be unable to hear yourself think be unable
as actors can be. He took criticism to heart. He
to think clearly as a result of an excessivewas a perfectionist. amount of noise, informal
to your heart content: see CONTENT. 
heart wear your heart on your sleeve make your
after your own heart of the type that you feelings apparent. 
like or understand best; sharing your
tastes. In medieval times, it was the custom for a ;
1988 Sebastian Barry Boss Grady Boys He took ! knight to wear the name of a lady on his
away every year had to give a man, and then sleeve during a tournament; the phrase was took away himself for good measure. He was a later popularized by Shakespeare in Othello: man after my own heart so will not blame For will wear my heart upon my sleeve, For him. daws to peck at. 
from the bottom of your heart or from the 1998 Spectator He... is not suffering from
heart with sincere feeling. compassion fatigue, yet neither does he wear
his heart on his sleeve. 
have the heart be insensitive or hard-heartedenough. your heart desire someone or something
1990 Neil Bissoondath On the Eve of Uncertain that is greatly wished for. 
Tomorrows Migue oesn have the heart to your heart sinks into your boots: see BOOT. 
force her to do what he knows she should be
doing. heartbeat
have or put your heart in be or become a heartbeat away from very close to; on the
keenly involved in or committed to an verge of. 
enterprise. hearthhave your heart in your mouth be greatly
hearth and home home and its comforts. 
alarmed or apprehensive. 
have your heart in the right place be sincere heat
or well intentioned. if you can stand the heat, get out of the
heart and soul great energy and enthusiasm. kitchen if you can deal with the
1977 Michael Frayn Alphabetical Order She pressures and difficulties of a situation
hasn been here long, know. But she put or task, you should leave others to deal
her whole heart and soul into this place. with it rather than complaining, proverb
141 hellin the heat of the moment while hedge
temporarily angry, excited, orhedge your bets try to minimize the risk of
engrossed, and without stopping for being wrong or incurring loss by pursuing
thought. two courses of action at the same time. 
turn the heat on someone or somethingHedging your financial liabilities,
concentrate pressure or criticism on especially bets or speculative investments,
someone or something, informal meant limiting your potential losses by also
turn up the heat intensify pressure or putting money on another outcome, in such a criticism, informal way as to balance, more or less, any potential loss on the initial transaction. In betting
terms, this specifically means putting money heather on more than one runner in a race. set the heather on fire be very exciting. 
Scottish 1992 Great Lakes Fisherman All three methods
have their proponents, and most anglers are
heave wise to hedge their bets by using more than
one method. 
heave in sight or into view come into view. informalheel
Heave meaning rise up, as on the swell of Achilles heel: see ACHILLES. 
a wave occurs in several nautical expressions; !
here the allusion is to the way that objects
at or to heel of a dog close to and slightly
appear to rise up over the horizon at sea. behind its owner. 
Bring someone to heel, meaning get
someone under control and make them act
heaven subserviently , is taken from this expression. 
in seventh heaven in a state of ecstasy. cool your heels be kept waiting,
In late Jewish and Muslim theology, there were considered to be seven heavens, and the A British variant of this is kick your heels. 
seventh of these was the highest, where a
state of eternal bliss was to be enjoyed. dig in your heels: see DIG. 
move heaven and earth make extraordinary down at heel Qof a shoe with the heel
efforts. worn down. of a person, place, or thing
1999 Dogs Today We may not be vets but we with a poor, shabby appearance. 
are owners who will move heaven and earth to drag your heels: see drag your feet at DRAG. 
help our dogs recover. 
kick up your heels have a lively, enjoyable
stink or smell to high heaven have a very
t echiefly North American
strong and unpleasant odour. set or rock someone back on their heels
the heavens opened it started to rain
suddenly and very heavily. astonish or discomfit someone. 
take to your heels or legs run away. 
heavy turn on your heel turn sharply round. 
heavy on using a lot of. under the heel of dominated or controlled
1984 Studs Terkel The Good War We were by. 
heavy on the Italian feeling in America. We 1990 Julian Fane Hope Cottage The exceptional
were more Italian than Italians. sufferings of Russia under the heel of Marxism
make heavy weather: see WEATHER. may in the long run have a redemptive effect. 
heck hellall hell broke or was let loose suddenly
a heck of a — used for emphasis in variousthere was chaos or uproar, informal
statements or exclamations, informal
be hell on be unpleasant or harmful to. 
Of dialect origin, heck is a late 19th- come hell or high water no matter what
century euphemism for hell. difficulties may occur. 
1989 Guardian It is not entirely true to say 1995 Ian Rankin Let It Bleed It was the one
everyone who is anyone has been coached appointment he known al ay he would
there, but a heck of a lot have. keep, come hell or high water. 
hello 142for the hell of it just for fun. informal hello
— from hell an extremely unpleasant or
a golden hello: see a golden handshake attroublesome instance or example of HANDSHAKE. 
something, informal
1998 Times As for Ellie Sykes, who calls herself help
the skating mum from hell , she pushier so help me God used to emphasize that you
still. mean what you are saying. 
get the hell out of escape from a place or This phrase alludes to the oath taken by
situation very quickly, informal witnesses in court when they swear to tell
give someone or get hell reprimand : the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but :
someone or be reprimanded severely. the truth, so help me God. informal
go to or through hell and back endure an hen
extremely unpleasant or difficult like a hen with one chick or chicken
experience. absurdly fussy and overanxious. 
rare or scarce as hen teeth extremelygo to hell in a handbasket undergo a rapidrare. 
process of deterioration. North American
informal As hens do not possess teeth, the
This expression has been recorded since implication is that something is rare to the
the early 20th century; variants of it include point of non-existence. The phrase was
go to hell in a handcart and go to hell in a originallya US colloquialism, dating from the !
basket. mid 19th century. 

1990 Nature Conservancy read widely onenvironmental issues and often feel that the her
world is going to hell in a handbasket. her indoors a humorous reference to a
hell for leather as fast as possible. man wife. British informal
This phrase dates from the late 19th herd
century, and originally referred to riding a ride herd on: see RIDE. 
horse at reckless speed. 
here
a or one hell of a — used to emphasize here today, gone tomorrow soon over or
something very bad or great, informal forgotten; short-lived or transient. 
1990 Stephen King The Stand If someone on 1996 Sunday Telegraph Apparently when
the committee has been leaking, we re in a people spend their money on things that are
hell of a jam. here today gone tomorrow, like flowers,
hell half acre a great distance. North American food and Champagne, it tells you more
about the state of the economy than when
hell hath no fury like a a scorned a they buy solid things. 
woman who has been rejected by a man
neither here nor there of no importance or
can be ferociously angry and vindictive. relevance. 
proverb 1993 Independent on Sunday The fact that
not a hope or chance in hell no hope or American audiences haven recognised it as a
chance at all. informal great film and appreciated its outstanding
acting is neither here nor there. 
A elaboration of this phrase is nota! snowball chance in hell. Herod
out-Herod Herod behave with extreme
play merry hell with throw into turmoil;cruelty or tyranny. 
disrupt, informal
raise hell make a noisy disturbance. Herod, the ruler of Judaea at the time of esus birth and the man responsible for
Q complain vociferously, informal ordering the massacre of boy babies in his
there will be hell to pay serious trouble will realm, was portrayed in medieval miracle
occur as a result of a previous action. plays as a blustering tyrant. The phrase is
from Shakespeare Hamlet: would have
informal such a fellow whipp for erdoing
until or till hell freezes over for an Termagant; it out-herods Herod. 
extremely long time or forever, informal143 high
herring high and dry especially of ships left
stranded by the sea as the tide ebbs out
a red herring: see RED. of the water. in a difficult position,
especially without resources. 
hewer 01996 Frank McCourt Angela Ashes hear he
hewers of wood and drawers of water left you high and dry, eh? don know how a
menia rudges; labourers. man in his right mind can go off and leave a
This expression refers to Joshua 9:21,
wife and family to starve and shiver in a
which tells the story of how the Israelites
Limerick winter. 
were tricked into sparing the lives of some of high and low in many different places. 
the indigenous inhabitants of the Promised 1993 Independent As the world press hunted
Land: And the princes said unto them, Let for him high and low, he was holed up in a
them live; but let them be hewers of wood country hotel. and drawers of water unto all the
congregation. high and mighty important andinfluential. thinking or acting as though
you are more important than others;hidden arrogant, informal
a hidden agenda a person real but high as a kite intoxicated. 
concealed aims and intentions. 
1993 New Scientist hear that the physics high days and holidays special occasions. 
community is fearful the government has a informal
hidden agenda and intends eventually to close
In the Church calendar a high day was
the Daresbury Laboratory. the day of an important festival. A holiday
originally holy day was similar but less
hide specific. Holiday now refers to any day off,
hide your light under a bushel keep quiet without any sacred significance, and so holy 
about your talents or accomplishments. ofayisusedif a specifically religious occasion is intended. A bushel is a unit of measurement equal to eight gallons: in former times the word 1998 Pamela Jooste Dance with a Poor Man  
also referred to a container able to hold this Daughter was too busy looking out for all of
amount. The expression has its source in you. only danced on high days and holidays. 
Matthew 5:15: neither do men light a candle, high old of a time or state most enjoyable or
and put it under a bushel, but on a
remarkable, informalcandlestick. 
1955 Jean Potts Death of a Stray Cat You
1997 Spectator Actors are not naturally people probably had a high old time chasing blondes. 
who believe in hiding their light under a bushel. high on the hog: see HOG. 
neither hide nor hair of someone not the high, wide, and handsome expansive and
slightest trace of someone. impressive; stylish and carefree in manner. 
informalhiding
on a hiding to nothing unlikely to succeed, This phrase originated in the USA, and
or in a position to gain no advantage if you Yankee Slang 1932 identifies Ride him,
do. British Cowboy, high, wide and handsome as a
shout commonly heard at rodeos. 1998 Spectator Which only goes to show that
even the most reflexive liberal panderer is on a 1990 Times Education Supplement Your eyes are
hiding to nothing in this territory. often distracted by high quality displays of
work, and the library is high, wide and
high handsome. 
be for the high jump be about to be severely
hit the high spots visit places of entertain-punished. British informalment, informal
This expression was first recorded in the in high feather: see in fine feather at
early 20th century as a military term meaning FEATHER. 
be put on trial before your commanding
officer. The image behind it is that of an on a high in a state of euphoria, informal
execution by hanging. 
This expression was originally mid 20th century US slang, referring specifically to the ifrom on high from a very high place. 
euphoria induced by drugs. 
from remote high authority or heaven. 
hike 144
on your high horse used to refer to someone so well known that they need not be
behaving in an arrogant or pompous recounted again. manner, informal
run high: see RUN. hithit and miss done or occurring at random;
hike succeeding by chance rather than through
take a hike go away used as an expression of planning. 
irritation or annoyance, informal 1998 New Scientist But not all species of
1998 Dennis Danvers Circuit of Heaven mosquitoes carry malaria and identifying the
going to bed now. Why don you take a hike? culprits is difficult, making control hit and
miss. hill hit-and-run Qof a person causing
a hill of beans: see BEAN. accidental or wilfu amage and escaping
ancient or old as the hills of very long before being discovered or stopped. of
standing or very great age. an incident or accident in which damage is
caused in this way. 
Hills are used in the Bible as a metaphor
for permanence. hit someone below the belt behave
deviously towards someone, especially so
over the hill past your best; declining, informal as to gain an unfair advantage. 
up hill and down dale: see UP. In boxing, delivering a blow below an
opponent waistline is against the rules. 
hiltup to the hilt completely. hit someone for six: see six. 
The image is that of plungingthebladeof hit the bottle: see BOTTLE. 
a knife deeply into something, so that only hit the bricks go on strike. US informal
the hilt is visible. 
hit the ground running start something and
proceed at a fast pace with enthusiasm. hind informal
on your hind legs: see LEG. 
This late 20th-century expression
achieved the status of a cliché in the 1990s. It hint seems likely to refer to military personnel
drop a hint: see DROP. disembarking rapidly from a helicopter,
though it cannot be definitely traced back to hip pocket any particular 20th-century war. in someone hip pocket completely under
1997 Independent Some targets move too fast,
someone control. North American even for a government that makes it clear it
has hit the ground running. 
hirehit the hay: see HAY. 
hire and fire engage and dismiss, especially
as indicating a position of established hit the headlines: see HEADLINE. 
authority over other employees. hit home: see HOME. 
1992 Martin Anderson Impostors in the Temple
hit it off with feel a liking for; be friendly
Usually the trustees, and they alone, hire andwith, informal
fire the president. They have fiduciaryresponsibility. hit the jackpot: see JACKPOT. 
hit the mark be successful in an attempt or
history accurate in a guess. be history Qbe perceived as no longer
relevant to the present, used to indicate The mark referred to here is a target in
shooting. 
imminent departure, dismissal, or death. 
informal hit the nail on the head state the truth
Country If Ducas does get the girl, you exactly; find exactly the right answer. 
can lay odds that she ll be history by the end of
1998 Spectator Yet his conceit and knack of
the song. hitting nails on heads meant that even his best
the rest is history used to indicate that the performances made him as many enemies as
events succeeding those already related are friends. 
145 hold
hit or miss as likely to be unsuccessful as 01998 Spectator Our conservatoires are still in
hock to the Germano-Austrian symphonicsuccessful. tradition. 
hit the right note: see NOTE. hit the road set out on a journey; depart. hog
informal go the whole hog do something completely
or thoroughly, informalO A US variant of this expression is hit the
trail. The origin of the phrase is uncertain, buta ;
fableinWilliamCowper sThe. oveof the
hit the sack: see SACK. World: Hypocrisy Detected 0779 issometimes hit the spot: see SPOT. mentioned: certain Muslims, forbidden
to eat pork by their religion but tempted to
hit where you live strike at your vital point. indulgeinsome,maintainedthatMuhammad !
2002 New York Times The movies hit had had in mind only one particular part of
teenagers where they live—in their own the animal. They could not agree which part ;
state of desperation and doubt. thatwas,andas foronepiecetheythoughtit hard From the whole hog to be debarred 
hitch between them they ate the whole animal,
each salving his conscience by telling himself hitch horses together get on well together; that his own particular portion was not the
act in harmony. US one that had been forbidden. Go the whole 
hitch your wagon to a star make use of hog is recorded as a political expression in the ;
powers higher than your own. USA in the early 19th century; an 1835 source ;
maintains that it originated in Virginia
T hs phrase was used by the American marking the democrat from a federalist. 
philosopher and poet Ralph Waldo Emerson in 1870 in the context of idealistic aspiration; live high on or off the hog have a luxurious
modern usage generally has the more cynical lifestyle. North American
implication of attaching yourself to someone 1991 Norman Mailer Harlot Ghost Even the
successful or famous in order to profit from oint Chiefs flunkies live high on the military
the association. hog. 
1998 Spectator Francis Bacon was among the hog in armour a person who is ill at ease. 
first to hitch his wagon to the star of the hog on ice an insecure person. North American
repulsive George Villiers.. James next informal
favourite. hoisthob hoist with your own petard: see PETARD. 
play or raise hob cause mischief; make a
fuss. North American holdjdon hold your breath: see BREATH. 
Hob is short for hobgoblin and is used in hold someone or something at bay: see BAY. 
this mid 19th-century expression to mean the devil. Compare with raise Cain at CAIN andhold the clock on time a sporting contest or
raise the devil at DEVIL. 
similar event. 
1993 Canadian Living When rainfinallycame, hold court be the centre of attention amidst a
it wouldn stop and played hob with the
lentils that were growing there for the first crowd of your admirers. 
time in a big way. hold the field: see FIELD. 
hold the fort take responsibility for aHobson situation while someone is absent. 
Hobson choice: see CHOICE. 
hold someone hand give a person comfort,
guidance, or moral support in a sad or
hockin hock having been pawned, in debt. difficult situation. 
hold hard used to exhort someone to stop or
Hock here comes from the Dutch word wait. British
hok meaning hutch or prison. Originally Hold hard was originally an exclamation mid 19th-century US slang, this sense of warning riders in the hunting field to pull
hock is now found only in this phrase or, hard on the reins to make their horses stop,
occasionally, in out of hock. similar to hold your horses below. 
holding 146
hold the line not yield to the pressure of a especially a business or, in the USA, a place
difficult situation. maintain a telephone where alcoholic drinks are sold illegally. 
connection during a break in the an automatic cash dispenser installed in
conversation. the outside wall of a bank. 
Sense 1 is a military metaphor, from the in a hole in an awkward situation from
idea of a line of soldiers withstanding an which it is difficult to escape, informal
attack without moving from their positions. 
This figurative use of hoe has been in use 01980 Shirley Hazzard The Transit of Venus But since the mid 18th century compare with dig if we made one exception we would naturally yourself into a hole at DIG. The English
be in no position to hold the line on similar politician Denis Healey described the first law cases. of politics as when you are in a hole, stopdigging. 
hold your horses wait a moment; restrain
your enthusiasm, informal in the hole in debt. North American
1999 Colin Dexter The Remorsefu ay Hold
your horses! One or two things like you money burns a hole in your pocket: see
to checkfirst,just to make it one hundred MONEY. 
per cent. need something like a hole in the head used
hold your own: see OWN. to emphasize that someone has absolutely
no need or desire for something, informalhold your peace: see PEACE. pick holes criticize. 
hold the stage: see STAGE. 
a square peg in a round hole: see PEG. 
hold your thumbs fold your fingers over your
thumbs to bring good luck; hope for luck or
success. South Africanholiday. 
a Roman holiday: see ROMAN. 
1987 Sunday Times South Africa They say they
are holding thumbs for her and praying thatthe pregnancy will be trouble-free. holier
hold your tongue remain silent, informal holier than thou characterized by an attitude
of self-conscious virtue and piety. 
hold someone or something to ransom: see
RANSOM. This phrase comes from Isaiah 65:5: Stand by thyself, come not near to me; for amhold water of a statement, theory, or line of
holier than thou. reasoning appear to be valid, sound, orreasonable. 
no holds barred no rules or restrictions apply hollow
in a particular conflict or dispute. beat someone hollow defeat or surpass
someone completely or thoroughly. 
No holds barred was originally a phrase
used only in wrestling, where it indicated in the hollow of your hand entirely in your
that there were no restrictions on the kinds of power. 
holds used. holy
holy of holies a place or thing regarded as
holding sacrosanct. 
be left holding the baby be left with an
unwelcome responsibility, often without The reference here is to the Hebrew
warning. phrasefortheinnerchamberofthesanctuary !
in the Jewish Temple at Jerusalem, separated 
j A US variant of this expression is be left by a veil from the outer chamber. 
holding the bag. 
there is no holding someone someone is home
particularly determined or cannot be bring something home to someone make
prevented from doing something. someone realize the full significance of
something. 
hole close or near to home of a remark or topic
blow a hole in ruin the effectiveness of of discussion relevant or accurate to the
something. point that you feel uncomfortable or
hole in the wall Qa smal ingy place, embarrassed. 
147 hook
come home to someone of the significance money by fair means, especially by hard
of something become fully realized by work. 
someone. an honest broker a disinterested
1981 Fannie Flagg Daisy Fay & the Miracle Man It intermediary or mediator. 
came home to me that night that Momma has
certainly lost her sense of humour. This expression is a translation of the
German ehrlicher Makler. In a speech in 1878 drive something home make something
the German statesman Bismarck 1815-98
clearly and fully understood by the use of recommended adopting this role in peace repeated or forcefully direct arguments. ! making, and the phrase became one of his
sobriquets. 
The verbs hammer, press, and ram are also 
used in place of drive. 
make an honest woman of marry a woman,
hit or strike home of a blow or a missile especially to avoid scandal if she is
reach an intended target, of a person pregnant, dated or humorous
words have the intended, often unsettling Honest here originally meant
or painful, effect on their audience. of respectable , but was probably associated
the significance or true nature of a with the archaic sense chaste or virtuous. 
situation become fully realized bysomeone. honour
home and dry successful in achieving your do the honours perform a socia uty or
objective, chiefly British small ceremony for others. 
A fuller version of this phrase, which dates honours are even there is equality in the
from the mid 20th century, is home and dry contest. British
on the pig back. 
in honour bound obliged by your sense of
home and hosed successful in achieving honour. 
your objective, chiefly Australian & New Zealand
1998 Times The championship was over, hoof
Manchester United were home and hosed. on the hoof of livestock not yet
home free successful in achieving your slaughtered, without great thought or
objective. North American preparation. 
a home from home a place where you are as 1997 Times Are we not witnessing an
happy, relaxed, or at ease as in your own example of Tony Blair making policy on the
hoof... with a decision to match the
home. circumstances, not the principle?
0 The North American version of this
expression is a home away from home. hook
home, James and don spare the horses! by hook or by crook by one means or
another; by fair means or foul. 
used as a humorous way of exhorting the
driver of a vehicle to drive home quickly. The hook referred to here is probably a
dated billhook or heavy curved pruning knife; one
of the earliest recorded instances of this
This was the title of a popular song by phrase is in Gower Confessio Amantis
F. Hillebrand in 1934; it represents a parody 1390, which uses the rare word hepe
of the instruction given to a coachman in the meaning a pruning knife in place of hook. 
days of the horse and carriage. Various folk etymologies for the expression
have been put forward, none of them
who — when — at home a humorously entirely convincing. In 1822 William Cobbett
emphatic way of asking about someone wrote of people who lived near woodland
identity. British being allowed, under the ancient forest law
1991 Joseph Connor Mothers Were All the of England, to gather dead branches for fuel,
Same The old lady said to tell that to Yuri which they may have brought down from the
Gagarin, but the hostess just giggled and said, trees literally by hook or by crook. 
Who he when he at home? 
1998 Adèle Géras Silent Snow, Secret Snow Till
then, she would hang on. By hook or by crook. honest Come what may. 
earn or turn an honest penny earn get or give someone the hook be dismissed
hookey 148
from a job or dismiss someone from a job. hoot
North American informal not care or give a hoot or two hoots not
hook It away. British informal care at all. informal
hook, line, a sinker used to emphasize 1990 Karen Lawrence Springs of Living Water
that someone has been completely tricked Never think about anybody but yourself, do
you? Never give two hoots about your poor
or deceived, informal little sister following you around. 
This phrase isa fishing metaphor: all three are items attached to a fishing rod and likely hop
to be gulped down by a greedy fish. The
phrase has been in use since the mid 19th hop the twig or stick depart suddenly. 
century. British informal
1996 Colin Bateman Of Wee Sweetie Mice & Menon the hop unprepared. British informal
Patricia wouldn know what had hit her. 1991 M. S. Power Come the Executioner He wen
She fall for me hook, line and sinker once down to the dining-room, catching the staff on
reminded her what we were all about. the hop, but they greeted him cheerfully
enough. 
off the hook no longer in trouble or
difficulty, informal of a telephone
receiver not on its rest, and so nothope
hope chest a chest containing linen, clothes,
receiving incoming calls. 
and household items stored by a woman in
Hook in sense 1 is a long-standing mid preparation for her marriage. North American
15th-century figurative use of the word to
mean something by which a person is caught : The British equivalent of this expression is and trapped , as a fish hook catches a fish. : bottom drawer see DRAWER. 
Sense 2 is a fossilized expression from the late 19th century, the early years of telephony, hope against hope cling to a mere
when the receiver literally hung on a hook. possibility. 
1995 Bill Bryson Notes from a Small Island on the hook for in a financial context plodded on, hoping against hope that there
responsible for. North American informal would be a pub or cafe in Kimmeridge. 
2001 High Country News Taxpayers are hope springs eternal it is human nature
currently on the hook for anywhere from $32 always to find fresh cause for optimism. 
billion to $72 billion in abandoned mine
cleanup costs. This is a shortened version of Alexander
off the hooks dead. British informal Pope line in An Essay on Man 1733: Hope springs eternal in the human breast. 
sling your hook leave; go away. British
informal 1992 Angela Lambert A Rather English Marriag
Hope springs eternal—she smiled wryly—
Sling your hook appears in a slang even in Tunbridge Wells. 
dictionary of 1874, where it is defined as a
polite invitation to move on. 
horizon
1998 Times now realise that Sylvia hasn on the horizon just imminent or becoming
heard from him since she told him to sling his apparent. hook. 
Horlickshookey make a Horlicks of make a mess of. British
play hookey stay away from school without informal
permission or explanation; play truant. 1988 Joanna Trollope The Choir He thought
North American informal privately that they would make a fearful
horlicks of running the choir. hoop
put or go through the hoopshorn
make someone undergo or be made to blow or toot your own horn talk boastfully
undergo a difficult and gruelling test or about yourself or your achievements. North
series of tests. American
1994 Legion The crew was as fast and efficient draw or pull in your horns become less
as any they had put through the hoops. assertive or ambitious; draw back. 149 hot
The image here is of a snai rawing in its horses for courses different people are
retractile tentacles when disturbed. suited to different things or situations. 
1991 Paul Grescoe Flesh Wound Hollywood earliest recorded instance of this
major studios were pulling in their horns in expression, in A. T. Watson Turf 1891,
the wake of a disastrous Christmas season. suggests its origin: A familiar phrase on the
turf is "horses for courses"... the Brighton
on the horn on the telephone. North American
Course is very like Epsom, and horses that win informal atone meeting often win at the other. 
on the horns of a dilemma faced with a
decision involving equally unfavourable 1989 Guardian It a question of horses for
alternatives. courses, finding the best route forward and
adopting the practices to fit that rather than
A mid 16th-century source described a bulldozing your way through without perhaps
dilemma as a horned argument after Latin realising the wider environment in which this
argumentum cornutum, the idea being that needs to work. 
if you avoided one horn of the argument a Trojan horse: see TROJAN. 
you ended up impaled on the other. wild horses won drag someone to
something or something from someone
hornet nothing will make someone go to a
a hornets nest a situation fraught with particular place or divulge particular
trouble, opposition, or complications. information, informal
1992 New Scientist The notion of these life 1998 Times As things stand, wild horses
patents has opened up a hornets nest of wouldn drag children to a symphony
moral, legal, social and scientific concerns. concert. 
horse hostagea dark horse: see DARK. a hostage to fortune an act, commitment, or
don change horses in midstream choose a remark which is regarded as unwise
sensible moment to change your mind. because it invites trouble or could prove
proverb difficult to live up to. 
This expression is quoted by Abraham The original hostages to fortune were a
Lincoln in 1864 as the saying of an old Dutch man family, the allusion being to Francis
farmer. Early versions of it used swap insteadBacon essay on marriage 1625: He that
of change. hath wife and children hath given hostages
to fortune. 
eat like a horse eat heartily and greedily. 
frighten the horses cause consternation or
dismay; shock. hot
1996 Independent No matter the inadvertent blow hot and cold: see BLOW. 
hurt or crass provocation or outright insult, drop someone or something like a hot
bite your tongue, be pleasant, be polite, don tpotato quickly abandon someone or
frighten the horses. something, informal
straight from the horse mouth from the
person directly concerned or another Dmp here is used literally, but also in the
authoritative source. figurative sense of end a social acquaintance
with someone. A hot potato can be used
This expression refers to the presumed independently as a metaphor for a
ideal source for a racing tip and hence of controversial or awkward issue or problem
other useful information. that no one wants to deal with. 
1998 New Scientist PhD students will be able to go hot and cold experience sudden feelings
learn these subjects direct from the horse of fear, embarrassment, or shock. 
mouth. 1973 Anthony Price October Men His wife had
hitch horses together: see HITCH. said... that she had gone all hot and cold 
a horse of another or different colour a after nearly being run over. 
thing significantly different. have the hots for be sexually attracted to. 
1975 Sam Selvon Moses AscendingTwo or three informal
is okay, but when you start bringing in a 1996 Janette Turner Hospital Oyster One
battalion, it is a horse of a different colour. summer night, there was a man with a knife, a
hour 150
man on my own surveying team, a man This phrase alludes to Matthew 12:25:
fancied, a man knew had the hots for me. Every city or house divided against itself shall hot air emptytalk that is intended to impress. not stand , that is, will be unable to withstand 1998 Times If a chief executive is convinced external pressures. 
that a day spent hot-air ballooning is a more
effective way of motivating the troops than a a house of cards an insecure or over lot of hot air from him or her, then anything ambitious scheme. 
goes. Literally, a house of cards is a structure of hot and heavy intense; with intensity. North playing cards balanced together. 
American informal
1992 New York Times Book Review Integrated
hot on the heels of following closely. Resources later proved to be a house of cards,
hot to trot ready and eager to engage in an costing Drexel customers many millions
activity, informal when it collapsed. 
hot under the collar angry, resentful, or on the house of drinks or a meal in a bar or
embarrassed. restaurant free. 
1995 Edward Toman Dancing in Limbo It seems put or set or get your house in order make
that the gentleman in question has been necessary reforms. 
getting very hot under the collar of late about 2002 New York Times There will be no moral
our public image. credibility for the bishops to speak about
in hot water in a situation of difficulty, ustice, truth, racial equality, war or
trouble, or disgrace. immigration if they can get their own house
1997 TV Quick Hunterfindshimself in hot in order. 
water when a local TV reporter accuses him of safe as houses thoroughly or completely
police brutality—and is later found dead. safe. British
make it or things hot for a k elife difficult for someone. houseroom
sell like hot cakes: see CAKE. not give something houseroom be unwilling
too hot to hold you of a place not safe to to have or consider something. British
remain in because of your past misconduct. The word houseroom, dating from the
1984 Gwyn Jones A History of the Vikings Of late 16th century, literally means lodging or Naddod we read that he was... a viking of note accommodation in a house. 
who seems to have made Norway and other
1986 Liz Lochhead True Confessions Course do
Norse settlements too hot to hold him. get the Woman and the Woman Own plus swap Options for the Cosmopolitan off our Joy. 
hour wouldn give Woman Realm houseroom. 
keep late or regular hours do the same housetop
thing, typically getting up and going to bed, proclaim or shout something from the
late or at the same time every day. housetops announce something publicly. 
the small hours: see SMALL. 
till all hours till very late, informal
Hoyle
according to Hoyle according to plan or therules. house
Edmond Hoyle 1672-1769 wrote aeat out of house and home:
number of authoritative books about whist
see EAT. and other card games; his name, at first
get on or along like a house on fire have synonymous with expert opinion on card
games, became a metaphor for the highest
a very good and friendly relationship. authority in all fields. 
go round or all round the houses take a
circuitous route to your destination. take 1989 Tom Bodett The End of the Road His
divinely inspired plan had gone exactly
an unnecessarily long time to get to the according to Hoyle. He fooled them. 
point. house and home a person home used forhuff
huff and puff breathe heavily with
emphasis. exhaustion express your annoyance in
a house divided a group or organization an obvious or threatening way. 
weakened by interna issensions. 151 hustlehum hump
hum and haw or ha hesitate; be indecisive. live your be self-sufficient, informal
British
The image here is of the camel, which is
The word hum has been used as an famous for surviving on the fat in its hump inarticulate syllable in hesitant speech since without feeding or drinking. 
Chaucer; ha appears in a similar role from the early 17th century. over the hump over the worst. humble hurt
eat humble pie make a humble apology and someone or something wouldn hurt a fly:
accept humiliation. see FLY. Humble pie is from a mid 19th-century
pun based on umbles, meaning offal , hustle
which was considered to be an inferior hustle your butt move or act quickly. North
food. American informal
1998 Spectator A white youth behind us did Other variants of this phrase include
shout racial abuse. But... after the game was hustle your buns and, in vulgar slang, hustle over his companions forced him to come up to ! your ass. 
Darcus to eat humble pie. li
else will, especially make a sexual
advance, informal
dot the and cross the  : see T. 
ice if
if anything used to suggest tentatively that
break the ice do or say something to relievesomething may be the case often the
tension or get conversation started at the
opposite of something previouslystart of a party or when people meet for the
implied. first time. 
on ice especially of a plan or proposal illusion
held in reserve for future consideration. 
be under the illusion that wrongly believe
of wine or food kept chilled by being that. 
surrounded by ice of an entertainment 1998 Independent The keening harmonies of
performed by skaters. the Brothers Gibb, a million naff dance
0 1 9 5 Times Education Supplement In Kent routines by medallion men under the illusion
plans for 10 more nursery classes next year are that they were John Travolta. on ice. 
be under no illusion or illusions be fully
skating on thin ice in a precarious or risky aware of the true state of affairs. 
situation. 1992 Christian Scientist Monitor It is crucial
to the nation security... that we be under no
iceberg illusions about reasons for this zero-loss rate. 
the tip of an or the iceberg the small
perceptible part of a much larger image
situation or problem which remains a graven image: see GRAVEN. 
hidden. This phrase refers to the fact that onlyimitation
about one fifth of the mass of an iceberg is imitation is the sincerest form of flattery
visible above the surface of the sea. copying someone or something is an
implicit way of paying them a compliment. 
1998 New Scientist This leaves pressure groups proverb
wondering whether there are further
breaches still waiting to be discovered. Sue
Mayer of Gene Watch asks: Is it the tip of the improve
iceberg? improve the shining hour make good useof time; make the most of your time. 
icing literary
the icing on the cake an attractive but This expression comes from Isaac Watts  
inessential addition or enhancement. Divine Songs for Children 1715: How doth the little busy bee Improve each shining
A North American variant of this phrase is hour. 
the frosting on the cake. 
1996 Independent State education is no
longer always free. The jumble sale and the in
summer fair, which used to provide the icing be in for have good reason to expect
on the school cake, are now providing the typically something unpleasant. 
staple fare. 1988 Hugh Scott The Shaman Stone The
weather will break soon, then we ll be in for a
idea storm. 
get or give someone ideas become or be in on be privy to a secret. 
make someone ambitious, big-headed, or have it in for someone have hostile feelings
tempted to do something against someone towards someone, informal
153 interest
in with enjoying friendly relations with. In cricket, an innings is the period that a
informal team or batsman spends batting, and a good 
1990 Jeffrey Masson Final Analysis was in innings is one during which a lot of runs are demand everywhere... simply because was scored. 
in with the right people. 
2002 Oldie He keeps dropping heavy hints
the ins and outs all the details of something. when he visits: he... said the other evening have had a good innings am 86. 
inchgive someone an inch once concessions have innocence
been made to someone they wil emand a in all innocence without knowledge of
great deal. something significance or possibleconsequences. 
The full form of the saying is the proverb 1992 Jeff Torrington Swing Hammer Swing! d
give someone an inch and he will take a mile. 
given him the matches in all innocence but
In former times, ell an obsolete measure of
length equal to a little over a metre was
that didn let me off the hook. sometimes substitued for mile. inside
within an inch of your life almost to the on the inside in a position affording private
point of death. information, informal
1997 Marian Keyes Rachel Holiday He kept 1932 Daily Express have chatted with men
touching his hair, which, as well as being dyed who are believed to be on the inside, and they
to within an inch of its life, was blowdried, have informed me that there will certainly be
flicked and rigid with spray. changes at forward and in the three-quarter
line. incline
incline your ear listen favourably, literary inside out
know someone or something inside out
Incline thine ear is an expression used know someone or something very
throughout the Bible, for example in Psalms 17:6: have called upon thee, for thou wilt thoroughly. 
hear me, God: incline thine ear unto me, turn something inside out turn the inner
and hear my speech. surface of something outwards. change
something utterly.
2002 New Republic My every preconception
Indian about Renaissance tapestry had been turned
Indian summer Qa period of dry, warm inside out. 
weather occurring in late autumn a
tranquil or productive period in someone insult
later years. add insult to injury do or say something that
1930 Vita Sackville-West The Edwardians makes a bad or displeasing situation even
Meanwhile she was quite content thatworse. Sebastian should become tanned in the rays of
Sylvia Indian summer. ri phrase comes from Edward Moore play The Foundling 1748: This is adding
influence insult to injuries. 
under the influence affected by alcoholic
drink, especially beyond the legal limits for
driving a vehicle; drunk, informalintentto all intents and purposes in all importantrespects. 
Injun 1992 London Review of Books For if in 1976
honest Injun honestly; really, dated pianists really were about to lose the skill of
polyphonic piano-playing, then to all intents
injury and purposes the skill of playing the piano was
do yourself an injury suffer physical harm or at an end. damage, informalinterest
innings declare an or your interest make known
have had a good innings have had a long and your financial interests in an undertaking
fulfilling life or career. British informal before it is discussed. 
interference 154
interference an iron hand or fist in a velvet glove
firmness or ruthlessness masked by
run interference intervene on someone soutward gentleness. 
behalf, typically so as to protect them from
distraction or annoyance. North American iron out the wrinkles resolve all minor
informa ifficulties and snags. 
Run interference is a metaphor from Iron out has been in figurative use
American football, where it refers to the legal since the mid 19th century; it often occurs
blocking of an opponent to clear a way for with other nouns, especially differences. 
the ball carrier. 1984 New Yorker Willa had sold her story
to Universal Pictures and was in California
iron ironing out some wrinkles in the deal. 
have many or other irons in the fire have new off the irons newly made or prepared;
many or a range of options or courses of brand new. dated
action available or be involved in many
The irons here are engraved stamps used activities or commitments at the same for impressing a design or figure on
time. something, as in coining money, striking a
medal, or embossing paper. This sense isVarious tools and implements made or
now obsolete and survives only in thisformerly made of iron are called irons, forphrase. 
example grappling irons or branding irons,
The metaphor is of a blacksmith or other
worker who heats iron objects in a fire until strike while the iron is hot: see STRIKE. 
they reach the critical temperature at which they can be shaped or used. itching
an itching palm an avaricious or greedy
an iron curtain an impenetrable barrier, nature. 
especially the Iron Curtain, the physical and 1937 Wyndham Lewis The Revenge for Love
other barriers preventing the passage of Had Alvaro been bribed? Had such a man
people and information between the an itching palm like the rest of them?
Soviet bloc and the West during the cold
war. itchy
In the late 18th century, an iron curtain get or have itchy feet be restless; have a
was literally a fire curtain in a theatre, butthe strong urge to travel or move from place to
figurative sense was in use from the early place, informal
19th century, well before Winston Churchill
observed in a speech in March 1946 that an item
iron curtain has descended across the
be an item of a couple be involved in
Continent of Europe . 
an established romantic or sexual
the iron entered into someone soul relationship, informal
1997 Independent It is fair to say they are an
someone became deeply and permanently
item but they are not engaged, said one of
affected by imprisonment or ill-treatment. Mr Brown closest confidantes. literary
This expression comes from a phrase in ivory
the Latin Vulgate version of the Bible, ferrum tickle or tinkle the ivories play the piano. 
pertransit animam ejus, a mistranslation of informal
the Hebrew which literally translates as his
person entered into the iron , meaning he The ivories are the white keys of the
was placed in fetters. piano, traditionally made of ivory. 
jjack ambefore you can say Jack Robinson very have jam on it have some additional
quickly or suddenly, informal pleasure, ease, or advantage. 
1974 Olivia Manning Rain Forest Hugh... 
j This expression was in use inthe late 18th ; was free to leave at six... Pedley... said:
century, but neither an early 19th-century TouVe a Qn k. a 
popular song about Jack Robinson nor some ; sunset
mid 19th-century attempts to identify the
eponymous Jack Robinson shed any light on ; a a pleasant thing is
its origins. often promised but rarely materializes. 
:Britishevery man Jack each and every person. 
jnforma ThisexpressioncomesfromLewisCarroll Through the Looking-Glass 1871: The rule
Jack is a pet name form of the forename ; is jam tomorrow and jam yesterday—but
:ohn. It was sometimes used in informal never jam today. 
American speech as a form of address to a
man whose name you did not know, and as a i. generic name for any ordinary or working- ane
class man. plain Jane an unattractive girl or woman. 
2002 Guardian Thefilm assembles its
m all right. Jack used to express or stereotypes the sexy exchange student, the
comment upon selfish complacency. plain Jane who really a fox, the jock who is
informal only dating her for a bet then proceeds to
gunk them all with a ton of scatalogical
m a right. Jack was an early 20th- prankery. 
century catchphrase which became the titleof a 1959 British film. »»»cIZZ
jack of all trades and master of none and all that jazz and such similar things,
a person who can do many different informal
types of work but has special skill in "a Sunkn own origin; was us ed 
none
- informally to mean meaningless talk within !
 " : a decade of the word first appearance in its ack is used here to mean a general ... .. _. ;T
., = musical sense, in the early 20th century. 
}: labourer or odd-job mana sense dating _,.. ,. 3
.... ,_.. : This phrase was a mid 20th-centuryy
from the mid 19th century.7
development. 
jackpot
on your Jack on your own. British informal ekyll
" " 1 6 0 "p 0 cs"world affairs"film stars:
b an that Z th thi hathitFthe jackpot win a jackpot,
Thi ab br eviaïion haveilang l
of the rhyming great ekyllf and
f Hyde
f a person & alternately 5 eor
unexpected success, .. especially in : displaying opposing good and
adult world seems obsessed with, do notevil
making a lotonofyour: expression moneyack quickly,ones. informal personalities.. „t
i; Originally, in the late 19th century, interest us
The Strange at all. Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde
ackpot was a term used in a form of poker, 1886 is a novel by Robert Louis Stevenson, in
where the pot or pool accumulated until a which the physician Jekyll, in orderto indulge
player could open the betting with a pair of his evil instincts, uses a drug to create the
jacks or higher cards. It is now used of any persona of Hyde, which at first he can assume
large money prize that accumulates until it is at will but which gradually gains control of
won. him. jerk 156jerk obs for the boys used in reference to the
practice of giving paid employment to your
put a jerk in it act vigorously, smartly, or friends, supporters, or relations. British
quickly, informal, dated derogatory
1939 C. Day Lewis Child of Misfortune Put a jerk 2002 Guardian The James Report found the
in it. meeting my boy at the second house unit operated a jobs for the boys recruitment
at the Royal. policy favouring Reed friends and political
acquaintances. 
jewel
the jewel in the or someone crown the ust the job exactly what is needed. British
most attractive or successful part of informal
something. make the best of a bad job: see make thebest of it at BEST. 
In the early 20th century, this was used as a term for the British imperial colonies as a more than your job worth not worth
whole. The Jewel in the Crown was risking your job for. 
subsequently used by Paul Scott as the title of This phrase has given rise to the term
the first novel of his Raj Quartet, which is set obsworth, which is applied to the kind of
in the last days of British rule in India. 
person, usually a minor official, who says it more than my job worth as a way of
jib ustifying an insistence on petty rules, even at the expense of common sense. the cut of someone jib: see CUT. 
jig oin
in jig time extremely quickly; in a very short oin the club: see CLUB. 
time. North American informal oin the great majority die. euphemistic
the jig is up the scheme or deception is This expression was first used by the poet revealed or foiled. North American informal Edward Young 1683-1765: Death joins us
The sense of jig here dates from the late to the great majority. However, the idea of
16th century and means jest or trick. Thejig the dead being the majority is a very old
is over is recorded from the late 18th century one; it is found, for example, in the writings !
in the USA and the usual modern version with of the Roman satirist Petronius as abiit ad
up appeared only slightly later. plures: he gone to join the majority. jingbang oint
the whole jingbang the whole lot. informal out of joint of a specified joint out of
position; dislocated in a state of disorder
The origins of jingbang and its variant or disorientation. 
jimbang, both found only in this phrase, are
1601 William Shakespeare Hamlet The timeuncertain. is out of joint. Job oke
a Job comforter a person who aggravates get or be beyond a joke become or be
distress under the guise of giving comfort. something that is serious or worrying. 
informalO In the Bible, Job was a prosperous manwhose patience and piety was tested by a
2002 Guardian The rogue animal is believed to
series of undeserved misfortunes. The
have attacked at least six residents in the past
attempts of his friends to comfort him only week, and his antics are now described by
add to his sense of despair and he tells them: residents as well beyond a joke. 
miserable comforters are ye all Job 16:2. the joke is on someone someone looks
Despite his ordeals, he remains confident of foolish, especially after trying to make
the goodness and justice of God and in thesomeone else look so. informal
end he is restored to his former situation. 
1998 Spectator He turned out to be as right as
rain... so the joke was on us. 
jobdo a job on someone do something which oker
harms or defeats an opponent, informal the joker in the pack a person or factor
157 ump
likely to have an unpredictable effect on ump
events. 
get or have the jump on get or have an
In a pack of playing cards, a joker is an advantage over someone as a result of your
extra card which does not belong to one of prompt action. North American informal
the four suits clubs, diamonds, hearts, and 1 1 2 George Ade Knocking the Neighbors Rufus
spades and usually bears the figure of a was sinfully Rich... his Family had drilled into
jester. It is used in some card games as a trump jhim the low-down Habit of getting the Jump
and in poker as a wild card. on the Other Fellow. 
1973 George Sims Hunters Point Fred Wheeler go and jump in the lake go away and stop
may be the joker in the pack. He might have being a nuisance, informal
got Dave involved in something wild. 1998 New Scientist He is in some unexplained
way independent of his genes... if they don t
Joneses like what he does, his genes can go jump in the
keep up with the Joneses try to maintain the lake. 
same social and material standards as your ump someone bones have sex with
friends or neighbours. someone. North American vulgar slang
ump down someone throat respond to
This phrase originated as a comic-strip
title, Keeping up with the Joneses—by Pop what someone has said in a sudden and
in the New York Globe 1913. Jones, one of angrily critical way. informal
the most common British family names, is umpthegun act before the proper or
j used as a generic name for neighbours or appropriate time, informal
presumed social equals. 
l athletics, a competitor who jumps the 
gun sets off before the starting pistol has journey been fired. The expression appears in the
a sabbath day journey: see SABBATH. early 20th century as beat the gun. 

joy ump on the bandwagon: see BANDWAGON. 
full of the joys of spring lively and ump out of your skin be extremely startled. 
cheerful. informal
wish someone joy used to congratulate ump the queue push into a queue of
someone on something. British, chiefly ironic people in order to be served or dealt with
2001 Daily Telegraph I... wish Lord Hamlyn, before your turn. take unfair precedence
Tony and Chérie every possible joy of sex,
over others. money, and all the rest of it. 
The US version of this expression sjump 
Judas in line. a Judas kiss an act of betrayal, especially one
disguised as a gesture of friendship. ump the rails or track of a train become
dislodged from the track; be derailed. Judas Iscariot was the disciple who
ump the shark of a television series or film
betrayed Jesus to the authorities in return for thirty pieces of silver: And he that betrayed
reach a point at which far-fetched events
him gave them a sign, saying, Whomsoever : are included merely for the sake of
shall kiss, that same is he: hold him fast novelty, indicative of a decline in quality. 
Matthew 26:48. US informal
This phrase issaid to referto an episode of judgement the long-running US television series Happy
Days, in which the central character the
against your better judgement contrary to
Fonz jumped over a shark while waterskiing. what you feel to be wise or sensible. 
jugular ump ship 0of a sailor leave the ship on
which you are serving without having
go for the jugular be aggressive or
obtained permission to do so. suddenly
unrestrained in making an attack. 
1997 Cosmopolitan Once she decides she wants abandon an organization, enterprise, etc. 
a man, she goes for the jugular and doesn jump through hoops be obliged to go
give a hoot about any other woman such as through an elaborate or complicated
his girlfriend. procedure in order to achieve an objective. umping 158
2002 Guardian For the Going Underground who are strong and apply ruthless self single in 1980, the producer made Weller interest will be most successful. 
ump through hoops to deliver a convincing 1989 Bessie Head Tales of Tenderness & Power
vocal performance. And at the beer tank the law of the jungle
jump or leap to conclusions or the prevailed, the stronger shoving the weaker. 
conclusion form an opinion hastily, before
you have learned or considered all the facts. 
ury
jump to it take prompt and energetic action. 
the jury is out a decision has not yet been
1974 Marian Babson The Stalking Lamb When reached on a controversial subject. 
you hear my signal—jump to it! 1998 New Scientist The jury is still out, but it
on the jump Qmoving quickly, abruptly; looks as if there are no significant changes in
swiftly, informal the cosmic dust flux during past climate
1972 Judson Philips The Vanishing Senator Get cycles. 
over here on the jump... Step on it, will you?one jump ahead one step or stage ahead of
someone else and so having the advantage
ustice
over them. do someone or something justice or do
ustice to someone or something treat or
represent someone or something with due
jumping fairness or appreciation. 
be jumping up and down be very angry,
upset, or excited, informa yourself justice perform as well as you are
able to. jungle poetic justice: see POETIC. 
the law of the jungle the principle that those rough justice: see ROUGH. 
Kkpicnic itself. By the mid 18th century, the
kangaroo novelist Henry Fielding was using the phrase
have kangaroos in the or your top to mean a muddle. 
paddock be mad or eccentric. Australianinformal
1985 Peter Carey Ulywacker And he was a key
big man too, and possibly slow-witted. in or out of key in or out of harmony. 
Leichhardt? No, Bourke... He hadkangaroos in his top paddock. 
keen kibosh
put the kibosh on put an end to; thwart the
keen as mustard extremely eager orplans of. informal
enthusiastic. British informal
The meaning and origin of kibosh is
Keen is used here to mean operating on !
uncertain. Putthekye-bosk on her is used by the senses like a sharp instrument. a pot-boy in Charles Dickens Sketches byBoz 1836. keep
keep the ball rolling: see BALL. kick
keep open house provide general kick against the pricks hurt yourself
hospitality. by persisting in useless resistance or
1950 Elizabeth Goudge Gentian Hill All well-to- protest. 
do Devon farmhouses keep open house onChristmas Eve. In the Bible, on the road to Damascus Saul heard the words: It is hard for thee to kickkeep something under wraps: see WRAP. 
againstthepricks Acts9:5. The image isthat keep up with the Joneses: see JONESES. ! of an ox or other beast of burden fruitlessly
keep your eye on the ball: see BALL. kicking out when it is pricked by a goad or
spur. keep your feet or legs manage not to fall. 
keep someone on their toes: see on your kick someone ass or butt dominate, beat,
toes at TOE. or defeat someone. North American vulgarslang
you can keep a good man or woman
down a competent person will always kick some ass or butt act in a forceful
recover well from setbacks or problems. or aggressive manner. North American vulgar
informal slang1995 Martin Amis Information You got to come
kettle on strong. Talk big and kick ass. 
a different kettle of fish a completely a kick at the can or cat an opportunity to
different matter or type of person from the achieve something. Canadian informal
one previously mentioned, informal kick the bucket die. informal
1993 Empire Meryl is the finest actress of her
generation but Arnold is, er, a different kettle The bucret in this phrase may be a pail on offish. which a person committing suicide might
stand, kicking it away before they hanged
the pot calling the kettle black: see POT. 
themselves. Another suggestion is that it
a pretty or fine kettle of fish an awkward refers to a beam on which something can be state of affairs, informal hung up; in Norfolk dialect the beam from
which a slaughtered pig was suspended by its ate 18th-century Scotland, a kettle of heels could be referred to as a bucket. 
fish was a large saucepan of fish, typically
freshly caught salmon, cooked at Scottish kick someone down the ladder reject or
picnics, and the term was also applied to the disown the friends or associates who have
kid 160
helped you to rise in the world, especially kick your heels: see cool your heels at HEEL. 
with the idea of preventing them from kick yourself be annoyed with yourself for
attaining a similar position. doing something foolish or missing an
kick the gong around smoke opium, informal opportunity. 
Gong is early 20th-century US slang for a more kicks than halfpence more harsh
narcotic drug, especially opium. treatment than rewards, informal, dated
kick the habit stop engaging in a habitual kid
practice, informal handle or treat someone or something
1992 Economist Perhaps it is time for ex-French
with kid gloves deal with someone or
West Africa to choose its own forms of
something very gently or tactfully. 
government... and kick the habit of turning
to France whenever trouble starts. Kid gloves are those made with leather
a kick in the pants or up the arse or ! from a young goat skin. 
backside something that prompts or
forces fresh effort, informal kids stuff something that is childishly
1996 Southern Cross On Saturday night, Mr simple or naive, informal
Groom said the party understood the 1982 Vivien Alcock The Sylvia Game He had
electorate had given the Liberals a kick in the grown out of the game; it was kid stuff. 
pants. Besides it always landed him in trouble. 
a kick in the teeth a grave setback or a new kid on the block: see BLOCK. 
disappointment, especially one seen as a
betrayal, informal kill
1994 Daily Mirror The rates rise was a kick in be in at the kill be present at or benefit from
the teeth for the housing market, which had the successful conclusion of an enterprise. 
been showing signs of recovery. 
dressed to kill: see DRESSED. 
kick over the traces become insubordinate go or move in or close in for the kill take
or reckless. decisive action to turn a situation to your
Traces are the straps by which a draught advantage. 
horse is attached to the vehicle it is pulling. Ifif it kills you whatever the problems or
the animal kicked out over these straps, the difficulties involved, informal
driver would no longer be able to control it. 2001 Nancy Hope Wilson Mountain Pose m
cracking that code if it kills me. 
kick someone upstairs remove someone
from an influential position in a business kill the fatted calf: see FATTED. 
by giving them an ostensible promotion. kill the goose that lays the golden egg: see
informal GOOSE. 
kick someone when they are down cause kill or cure of a remedy for a problem likely
further misfortune to someone who is to either work well or fail catastrophically,
already in a difficult situation. with no possibility of partial success. British
kick something into touch remove some- 1998 Richard Gordon Ailments through the Ages
thing from the centre of attention or Mackenzie complained that the Germans 
policy was kill or cure : if they tried anactivity. British informal
elaborate laryngectomy, it would turn them
In football and rugby, the touchlines from surgeons into assassins. 
mark the sides of the playing area and if the kill two birds with one stone achieve two
ball is kicked beyond these into touch, it is
no longer in play. aims at once. kill someone with or by kindness spoil
1998 New Scientist The British public is more someone by overindulging them. 
interested in these matters than many
politicians think. Such issues cannot be kicked This expression dates back to the mid 16th into touch. century; it famously appears in the title of
Thomas Heywood play A Woman Killed
kick up a fuss or a stink register strong
with Kindness 1607. 
disapproval; object loudly to something. 
informal kill yourself laughing be overcome with
kick up your heels: see HEEL. laughter. 
161 kit
killing kiss and tell recount your sexual exploits,
especially to the media concerning a
make a killing have a great financial success,
especially on a stock exchange. famous person, chiefly derogatory
kiss someone arse or ass behave
kilter obsequiously towards someone, vulgar slang
out of kilter out of harmony or balance. 
kiss ass behave in an obsequious or
Kilter, dating from the early 17th century, sycophantic way. North American vulgar slang
was a dialect word meaning frame or order , It is now used only in this phrase. kiss my arse go away!; go to hell! vulgar slang
kiss of death an action or event that causes
certain failure for an enterprise. king expression may refer to the kiss of
King Charles head an obsession. betrayal given by Judas Iscariot to Jesus in the Garden of Gethsemane Matthew 26:48-9. 
Thisexpressionalludestothecharacterof Mr Dick , in Charles Dickens nove avid 1998 Spectator commend the Commission  
Copperfield, who could not write or speak on recent Green Paper and its efforts to introduce
any matter without the subject of King an enlightened, evolutionary discussion—
Charles head intruding. although hope my saying so will not be the
kiss of death. 
king of beasts the lion. kiss of life mouth-to-mouth resuscitation. 
king of birds the eagle. an action or event that revives a failing
king of kings Qa king who has lesser kings enterprise. 
under him. God. 01997 Anthony Barnett This Time She gave a
decrepit institution the kiss of life, when she
king of terrors death personified. became its adversary. 
King or Kaiser any powerful earthly ruler. kiss the dust submit abjectly; be overthrown. 
a king ransom a huge amount of money; a kiss the ground prostrate yourself as a token
fortune. of respect. In feudal times prisoners of war were
This phrase refers to the practice, found
freed for sums in keeping with their rank, so a particularly in courts of the ancient Eastern
king, as the highest-ranking individual,
world, of throwing yourself on the ground in jcommanded the greatest ransom. front of a monarch. 
take the King shilling: see SHILLING. 
kiss the rod accept punishment meekly orkingdom submissively. 
come into or to your kingdom achieve idiom refers to a former practice of
recognition or supremacy. making a child kiss the rod with which it was beaten. It is used by Shakespeare in Twotill or until kingdom come forever, informal
Gentlemen of Verona: How wayward is this !
to kingdom come into the next world, informal foolish love That, like a testy babe, will
scratch the nurse And presently all humbled
Kingdom come is the next world or : kiss the rod. 
eternity; it comes from the clause in the Lord !
Prayer thy kingdom come. kiss something goodbye or kiss goodbye
1996 Total Sport Graham Gooch may be fast to something accept the certain loss of
approaching his mid-forties but the old boy something, informal
still clatters most bowlers to Kingdomcome. kissy-face
kiss play kissy-face or kissy-kissy behave in an
have kissed the blarney stone: see BLARNEY. excessively friendly way in order to gain
favour, informal
a Judas kiss: see JUDAS. kiss and make up become reconciled. 
1991 Economist China and Vietnam are kit
preparing to kiss and make up in the cause of get your kit off take off all your clothes. British
socialist solidarity. informalkitchen 162
kitchen knee-high
everything but the kitchen sink everything knee-high to a grasshopper very a l or
imaginable, informal, humorous very young, informal, humorous
This expression was identified by Eric In this form the phrase apparently dates
Partridge in his Dictionary of Forces Slang from the mid 19th century, but early 19th 1948 as being used in the context of an century US versions include knee-high to a
intense bombardment in which the enemy toad and knee-high to a mosquito. 
fired everything they had except the kitchen 
sink or including the kitchen sink. knell
1965 Ed McBain Doll Brown began searching. ring the knell of announce or herald the end
Everything in here but the kitchen sink, heof. said. 
The image here is of the tolling of abellto kite announce a death or funeral. 
high as a kite intoxicated drugs oralcohol, informalknickers
This expression is a play on high meaning get your knickers in a twist become upset or
lofty and its informal sense intoxicated. angry. British informal
This expression was originally used
kith specifically of women, the humorous
kith a kin your relations. masculine equivalent being get your Y-fronts in a twist. 
Kith, an Old English word meaning
native land or countrymen , is now only 1998 Times not as anxious as was... Most
used in this phrase, which itself dates back to things these days, really not going to get
the late 14th century. The variant kith or kin is my knickers in a twist about. 
also sometimes found. 
knifean atmosphere that could cut with a
kitten knife: see A 
have kittens be extremely nervous or upset. 
before can say knife very quickly;
British informalalmost instantaneously, informal
kitty get or stick the knife into or in someone
scoop the kitty be completely successful; do something hostile or aggressive to
gain everything. someone, informal
go or be under the knife have surgery. 
lngamblinggames,thecrryisthepoolof money that is staked. informal
like a hot knife through butter very easily;
knee without any resistance or difficulty. twist or turn the knife deliberately make
at your mother or father knee at a n
someone grief or problems worse. 
early age. 1991 Mavis Nicholson Martha Jane & Me While
bring or something to their knees she and were playing the cat-and-mouse
reduce someone or something to a state game of these stories, would sometimes, just
of weakness or submission. to twist the knife a little further, ask about the
1997 Sunday Times Doom and gloom little girl father. 
merchants everywhere are predicting all the knives are out for someone there is
kinds of plagues befalling the world open hostility towards someone, informal
computer systems anytime now, bringing
business to its knees. knife-edgeon bended knee: see BENDED. 
on a knife-edge or razor edge in a tense
on your knees in a kneeling position. on situation, especially one finely balanced
the verge of collapse. between success and failure. 
weak at the knees overcome by a strong 2000 South African Times UK With the game
emotion. poised on a knife-edge, the Wallabies won a163 knocker
ruck and Gecrge Gregan pass wasfloatedto knock someone for six: see hit someone for
theflyhalf,who picked his line perfectly. 
six at six. 
knock someone or something on the head
knight decisively prevent an idea, plan, or
a knight in shining armour an idealized or
proposal from being held or developed. 
heroic person, especially a man who comes British informal
to the rescue of a woman in distress or in a
difficult situation. The image in this phrase is of stunning or killing a person or an animal by a blow to
This expression, a variant of which is a their head. 
knight on a white charger, is often used
ironicallyof someone who presents himself in knock someone sideways affect someone
this guise but is in fact inadequate to the role, very severely; make someone severely
Compare with a white knight at WHITE. depressed or unable to cope, informal
1998 Penelope Lively Spiderweb It always
knight of the road a man who frequents the knocked me sideways—the thought of what
roads, for example a travelling sales we carry around, stashed away. 
representative, lorry or taxi driver, or
knock someone socks off: see SOCK. 
tramp. knock something into a cocked hat: see
Originally, in the mid 17th century, this COCKED HAT. 
phrase was ironically applied to a highway man. knock spots off easily outdo, informal
This expression may refer to shooting out a white knight: see the pips spots on a playing card in a pistol- shooting competition. Although it is now knitting found chiefly in British English, the phrase
originated in America. stick to the or your knitting of an
organization concentrate on a known core 1997 Spectator Walter Laut Palmer 
area of business activity rather than Morning in Venice is a tour-de-force... It
diversify into other areas in which it has no knocks spots off the neighbouring, deeply
experience, informal unattractive, Monet of a gondola. 
knock them in the aisles amaze and impressknob people, informal
with knobs or brass knobs on and knock your head against a brick wall: see
something more. British informal bang your head against a brick wall at
1998 Pi Magazine But all this would count for HEAD. 
zilch if the music didn stand the test of time. knock someone or something into shape:
But it does, with knobs on. see lick someone or something into
shape at SHAPE. knockthe school of hard knocks: see SCHOOL. 
knock someone block off hit someone very
hard in anger, informal take a knock suffer a material or emotional
setback. 
Block is used here in its informal sense of knock on wood: see touch wood at WOOD. head. 
knock someone dead greatly impress knocked
someone, informal you could have knocked me or her, him,
1991 Julia Philips You ll Never Eat Lunch In This etc. down with a feather or she, he, etc. 
Town Again good at public speaking. ve was greatly surprised, informal
been knocking them dead at seminars. A similar idiom is found in Samuel
knock someone into the middle of next Richardson novel Pamela 1741 you might week hit someone very hard, informal have beat me down with a feather ; the
knock it off used to tell someone to stop modern form of the expression with knock
dates from the mid 19th century. doing something that you find annoying or
foolish, informal
knock on or at the door seek to join a knocker
particular group or sphere of action. on the knocker going from door to door,
knot 164
usually canvassing, buying, or selling. of know something like the back of your hand:
payment immediately; on demand. see BACK. 
Australian & New Zealand informal know the ropes be thoroughly acquainted
up to the knocker in good condition; to with the way in which something is done. 
perfection, informal informal

knot In its literal sense, this expression goes
at a rate of knots fast. British informal back to the days of sailing ships, when skill in handling ropes was essential for any sailor,
A knot here is a nautical unit of speed, The idiom is found in various forms, from the equal to one nautical mile per hour. mid 19th century onwards, g. learn or
understand the ropes and show or teach
cut the knot: see CUT. someone the ropes
tie the knot get married, informal
know the score be aware of what is going on. 
tie someone up in knots make someone 2002 New York Times Magazine Nowadays,
completely confused, informal everyone knows the score. Aside from
1996 Daily Star It looks like an open and shut discovering, say, that Tom Hanks is mean,
case until the brilliant QC starts getting the what story of show business ugliness would
prosecution witnesses tied up in knots. scandalize us?
know too much be in possession of too much
know important information to be allowed to live
— as know it as is familiar or customary or continue as normal. 
in the present. 
1991 Scientific American Now that all-out know what what have enough knowledge
nuclear war seems to be receding as an or experience, informal
imminent threat to life as we know it, 1992 More know what what at work, so no the National Aeronautics and Space one going to trip me up. 
Administration has come up with something
know what you like have fixed or definite
else to keep us worried: doomsday asteroids. 
tastes, without necessarily having the
be in the know be aware of something knowledge or informed opinion to support
known only to a few people. them. 
before you know where you are or before 2002 Sunday Herald We adjourn to Starbucks
where... know what like grand skinny
you know it with baffling speed, informallatte, £2. 15. 
know a thing or two be experienced or
know where the bodies are buried: see
shrewd. BODY. 
1993 Rolling Stone Andy Shernoff... knows a
thing or two about great glam punk. know where you are or stand with know
know better than be wise, well-informed, or how you are regarded by someone; know
well-mannered enough to avoid doing the opinions of someone on an issue. 
something specified. 1991 Julian Barnes Talking It Over Good old
1989 Anne Fine Goggle-Eyes Inspector McGee Stuart, he so reliable. You know where you
knows better than to tangle with Beth are with Stuart. 
granny. know who who be aware of the identity
know or not know from nothing be totally and status of each person. 
ignorant, either generally or concerning know your own mind be decisive and
something in particular. North Americancertain. 
informal
not know someone from Adam: see ADAM. 
know little or nothing and care less
be completely unconcerned about not know what hit you be hit, killed, or
something; be studiously ignorant. attacked by someone or something
know in the biblical sense have without warning. 
sex someone, informal, humorous not know what to do with yourself be at a
loss as to what to do, typically through
Know in this sense is an old use which is
particularly associated with language in the boredom, embarrassment, or anxiety. 
Bible, g. Genesis 4:1: And Adam knew Eve not know where or which way to look feel
his wife; and she conceived, and bare Cain. 
great embarrassment and not know how toreact. 165 knuckleknowing knuckle
there is no knowing no one can tell. go the knucklefightwith the fists. Australian
informalknown
near the knuckle verging on the indecent or
have known better days: see have seen
better days at DAY. offensive. British informal
In the late 19th century this expressionknows was used more generally to mean close to
for all someone knows used to express the the permitted limit of behaviour. 
limited scope or extent of someone sinformation. LI
labour Lady Luck chance personified as a
a labour of Hercules a task requiring controlling power in human affairs. 
enormous strength or effort. Lady Muck a haughty or socially pretentious
woman. British informal
In Greek mythology, Hercules was aman of superhuman strength and courage laldy
who performed twelve immense tasks or
labours imposed on him as a penance for
give it laldy do something with vigour or
killing his children in a fit of madness. enthusiasm. Scottish
After his death he was ranked among the
Laldy or laldie, as in give someone laldy,
gods. 
means a punishment or beating. 
a labour of love a task done for the love of a 1993 Irvine Welsh Trainspotting A chorus... 
person or for the work itself. echoes throughout the pub. Auld, toothless
Willie Shane is giein it laldy. labour the point explain or discuss
something at excessive or unnecessary lam
length. on the lam in flight, especially from the
police. North American informal
ladderkick someone down the ladder: see KICK. lamb
like a lamb to the slaughter as a helpless
lady victim. 
it isn over till the fat lady sings there is still
time for a situation to change. This expression is found in the Bible in
Isaiah 53:7: he is brought as a lamb to the
This phrase comes from the saying the slaughter , an image later applied to Jesus. 
opera isn over till the fat lady sings, which
originated in the 1970s in the USA; it is
doubtful whether any particular operatic lame
production or prima donna was ever lame duck: see DUCK. 
intended. lampladies who lunch women with the money smell of the lamp: see SMELL. 
and free time to meet for social lunches. informal land
This expression comes from the title of a
land on your feet: see fall on your feet at
1970s song by Stephen Sondheim: A toast to FALL. 
that invincible bunch... Let hear it for the how the land lies what the state of affairs is. 
ladies who lunch. While it is often used of
women who raise money for charity by
in the land of the living alive or awake. 
organizing fashionable lunches, it is also humorous
often used in a derogatory way of women
This is a biblical idiom: see, for example,
with the money and leisure to lunch at
ob 28:13: Man knoweth not the priceexpensive restaurants. 
thereof; neither is it found in the land of the :
living or Psalms 52:5: God shall likewise
Lady Bountiful a woman who engages in destroy thee for ever, he shall take thee away, ostentatious acts of charity to impress and pluck thee out of thy dwelling place, and others. root thee out of the land of the living. 
Lady Bountiful is the name of a land of Nod a state of sleep. 
character in The Beaux Stratagem 1707, a
play by the Irish Restoration dramatist In the Bible, the Land of Nod was the
George Farquhar. place to which Cain was exiled after the
167 lastmurder of his brother Abel Genesis 4:16. Ithas been used punningly to refer to sleep
largesince the 18th century, notably by Jonathan give or have it large go out and enjoy
Swift in Polite Conversation 1731-8: yourself, typically with drink or drugs. 
going to the Land of Nod. British informal
1999 London Student Clubbers had it large to
live off the land or the country live Americans Josh Wink and long-time Detroit
on whatever food you can obtain by supremo Derrick May. 
hunting, gathering, or subsistence large as life: see LIFE. 
farming. 1995 Empire Harrison Ford is the frazzled lark
father who ups his family from cosy suburbia up with the lark up very early in the
in an effort to live off the land, get back to morning. nature, etc. 
no man land: see NO. References to the early-morning singing
of the lark date back to the 16th century: the
first recorded instance is found in John Lyly  
landscape Euphues. Early risers are often referred to as
a blot on the landscape: see BLOT. larks, while their late-to-bed counterparts
may be described as owls. The phrase also
language employs a play on the word up, since the lark
sings on the wing while flying high above its
speak the same language understand onenest. 
another as a result of shared opinions andvalues. 1990 New Age journal translate between Larry
Greenpeace-speak and record industry-speak, happy as Larry: see happy as a sandboy at
because the two groups just don speak the HAPPY. 
same language. lash
lap have a lash at make an attempt at; have a go
at. Australian & New Zealand
fall or drop into someone lap of
something pleasant or desirable come last
someone way without any effort having be the last word be the most fashionable or
been made. up-to-date. 
in the lap of luxury in conditions of great 1989 Life Thanks to a built-in microchip,
comfort and wealth. Teddy Ruxpin became the last word in talking
in the lap of the gods of the success of a plan dolls. 
or event open to chance; depending on die in the last ditch: see DIE. 
factors that you cannot control. famous last words: see FAMOUS. 
This expression comes from one used in have the last word make or have the right
several passages in the works of the Greek to make the fina ecision or pronounce epic poet Homer. The original Greek refers to ment about something carry out a final
the knees of the gods, possibly because and conclusive action in a process or
suppliants laid gifts on the knees of those
course of events. who were sitting in judgement upon them. 
drinking in the last chance saloon having
been allowed one final opportunity to
lares improve or get something right, informal
lares and pénates the home. 1998 Times Gascoigne hasfinallyfound
himself in the Last Chance Saloon. 
On ancient Rome, the lares and pénates
were the protective gods of a household, and last but not least last in order of mention or
they came to be used to signify the home occurrence but not of importance. 
itself. The phrase lares and pénates is
the last of the Mohicans the sole survivors
generally used to refer to those thingsthat are considered to be the essential
of a particular race or kind. 
elements of someone home; in 1775 The Last of the Mohicans is the title of an Horace Walpole wrote in a letter am 1826 novel by James Fenimore Cooper
returned to my own Lares and Penates—to 1789-1851. The Mohicans, also spelled
my dogs and cats. Mohegans, were an Algonquian people who ;late 168
formerly inhabited the western parts of the laugh someone or something out of court
US states of Connecticut and Massachusetts. dismiss someone or something with
the last straw: see STRAW. contempt as being obviously ridiculous. 
last thing late in the evening, especially as a laugh someone or something to scorn
ridicule someone or something. 
final act before going to bed. 
This is a biblical idiom: see, for example,
on your last legs: see LEG. ob 12:4: am as one mocked of his
pay your last respects: see PAY. neighbour, who calleth upon God, and he
answereth him: the just upright man is
late laughed to scorn or Matthew 9:24: He said
late in the day at a late stage in proceedings, unto them, Give place: for the maid is not
especially too late to be useful. dead, but sleepeth. And they laughed him to scorn. !
A North American variant of this
expression is late in the game. laugh up your sleeve be secretly or inwardly
amused. 
the late unpleasantness: see
UNPLEASANTNESS. The use of up in this expression is arelatively recent development; the phrase
laugh dates from the mid 16th century in the form enough to make a cat laugh: see CAT. laugh in your sleeve. 
good for a laugh guaranteed to amuse or play something for laughs of a performer
entertain. try to arouse laughter in an audience,
1998 Spectator now ashamed to admit it, especially in inappropriate circumstances. 
but the fact remains that in 1979 voting Tory
did seem good for a laugh. 
have the last laugh be finally vindicated, laughing
thereby confounding earlier scepticism. be laughing be in a fortunate or comfortable
situation, informal
There are various proverbial sayings 2000 Ian Pattison A Stranger Here Myself
expressing this idea, such as he laughs best spotted a card in the window of a Lyons
who laughs last and he who laughs last, Tearoom. Dishwashers Wanted. No Exp. Nee
laughs longest. That it, said to Cotter, we re laughing. 
laugh all the way to the bank make a great no laughing matter something serious that
deal of money with very little effort, informal should not be joked about. 
1998 Country Life In the Taw Valley they don t
need to say cheese to raise a smile—they just laurels
whisper environment and laugh all the way look to your laurels be careful not to lose
to the bank. your superior position to a rival. 
laugh in someone face show open rest on your laurels be so satisfied with what
contempt for someone by laughing rudely you have already done or achieved that you
at them in their presence. make no further effort. 
the laugh is on me or you or him, etc. the
situation is reversed and now the other In ancient Greece, a wreath made of bay- tree laurel leaves was awarded as a mark of person is the one who appears ridiculous. distinction and, in particular, to victors at the laugh like a drain laugh raucously; guffaw. Pythian Games held at Delphi. 
British informala laugh a minute very funny. lavender
laugh yourself silly or sick laugh lay something up in lavender: see LAY. 
uncontrollably or for a long time. 
laugh on the other side of your face be law
discomfited after feeling satisfaction or be a law unto yourself behave in a manner
confidence about something. 
that is not conventional or predictable. 
A North American variant of this the law of the jungle: see JUNGLE. 
expression is laugh out of the other side of
your mouth. the law of the Medes and Persians: seeMEDES. 169 leaf
lay down the law issue instructions to other This expression originated as mid 20th people in an authoritative or dogmatic century jazz slang, meaning play at a brisk
way. speed. A fuller version is get the lead out of
your pants. Renowned for its weight, the
take the law into your own hands punish metal lead appears in a number of
someone for an offence according to your expressions as a metaphor for inertness or
own ideas of justice, especially in an illegal heaviness see, for example, go down like a
or violent way. lead balloon below and swing the lead
at SWING. 
take someone to law initiate legalproceedings against someone. 
go down or over like a lead balloon
there no law against it used in especially of a speech, proposal, or joke
spoken English to assert that you are fail; be a flop, informal
doing nothing wrong, especially in 1996 Prospect Simon Jenkins book,
response to an actual or implied Accountable to None, has gone down like a lead
criticism, informal balloon with most Conservative reviewers. 
lead someone a dance: see DANCE. 
lay lead someone by the nose control
lay rubber: see burn rubber at RUBBER. someone totally, especially by deceiving
lay eyes on: see clap eyes on at EYE. them, informal
lay a charge make an accusation. The image here is of an animal being
1989 Tony Parker A Place Called Bird We have controlled by a restraint round or in the nose, domestic assaults. The complainant lays a Shakespeare used this expression in Othello
charge. 1604: The Moor... will astenderly be led by ith nose As asses are. 
lay down the law: see LAW. 
lay a or the ghost get rid of a distressing, lead from the front take an active role in
frightening, or worrying memory or what you are urging and directing others to
thought. do. 
The image here is of exorcizing an lead in your pencil vigour or energy,
unquiet or evil spirit. especially sexual energy in a man. 
informallay it on the line: see LINE. 1972 Dan Lees Zodiac The couscous is
lay someone low Qof an illness reduce supposed to put lead in your pencil but with
someone to inactivity, bring to an end Daria needed neither a talking point nor an
the high position or good fortune formerly aphrodisiac. 
lead someone up the garden path: seeenjoyed by someone. 
GARDEN. 
lay something at someone door: see DOOR. 
lead with your chin behave or speak
lay something on the table: see TABLE. incautiously, informal
lay something on thick or with a trowel 
This expression originated as mid 20th grossly exaggerate or overemphasize century boxing slang, referring to a boxer  
something, informal ! stance that leaves his chin unprotected. 
lay something to rest soothe and dispel fear,
swing the lead: see SWING. 
anxiety, grief, and similar unpleasantemotions. 
lay something up in lavender preserve leaf
something carefully for future use. shake or tremble like a leaf tremble
The flowers and stalks of lavender were greatly, especially from fear. 
traditionally used as a preservative for stored j take a leaf out of someone book closely
clothes. imitate or emulate someone in a particularway. 
lay store by: see set store by at STORE. 1999 London Student Maybe the other colleges
should take a leaf out of Imperial book andlead try pub games instead of sports. 
get the lead out move or work more quickly; turn over a new leaf improve your conduct
hurry up. North American informal or performance. 
leak 170
The leaf referred to here is a page of a Catullus garçonnière but places that
book. The phrase has been used in this breathe History have always left me cold. 
metaphorical sense since the 16th century, leave much or a lot to be desired be highly
and while it now always means change for
the better , it could previously also mean just
unsatisfactory. change or even change for the worse. take French leave: see FRENCH. 
take leave of your senses: see SENSE. leak leechhave or take a leak urinate, informal
like a leech persistently or clingingly
spring a leak of a boat or container developpresent. 
a leak. 
This idiom refers to the way in which a
T expression was originally a nautical leech attaches itself by suction to the person one, referring to the timbers of a wooden or animal from which it is drawing blood: the ship springing out of position and so letting : parasites are very difficult to remove once
in water. they are attached to the skin and feeding. 
lean leeway
lean over backwards: see bend over make up the leeway struggle out of a bad
backwards at BACKWARDS. position, especially by recovering lost time. Britishleap
a leap in the dark a daring step or enterprise Leeway, which dates from the mid 17th
whose consequences are unpredictable. century, was the nautical term for the drift of a ship towards the side downwind of its
leap to the eye especially of writing be course. The figurative use of this phrase dates immediately apparent. from the early 19th century. 
by leaps and bounds with startlingly rapidprogress. left
be left at the post fail to compete, informal
lease
a new lease of or on life a substantially The image here is of a racehorse that fails improved prospect of life or use after to leave the starting post along with its rivals. rejuvenation or repair. 
1997 BBC Vegetarian Good Food Give salads, be left holding the baby: see G. 
sandwiches and jacket spuds a new lease of life hang a left: see A G. 
with a spoonful of flavoured mayonnaise. have two left feet be clumsy or awkward. 
left, right, and centre also left and right orleash right and left on all sides. 
strain at the leash: see STRAIN. 1996 Loaded She relocated to New York... 
quickly finding herself heralded left, right
least and centre as The Face Of The 80s. 
least said, soonest mended a difficult
situation will be resolved more quickly if leg
there is no more discussion of it. feel or find your legs become able to stand
not least notably; in particular. or walk. 
to say the least or the least of it used as an get your leg over of a man have sexual
understatement or euphemism to imply intercourse, vulgar slang
that the reality is more extreme, usually have the legs of be able to go faster or
worse. further than a rival. British1997 Spectator References in Mr Cole letter to
the bottle were, to say the least, distasteful. keep your legs: see keep your feet at KEEP. 
not have a leg to stand on have no facts or
leave sound reasons to support your argument or
leave someone cold fail to interest someone. ustify your actions. 
1993 James Merril A Different Person might on your hind legs standing up to make a
have waxed sentimental over the ruins of speech. British informal171 letter
on your last legs near the end of life, leopardusefulness, or strength. 
1987 Eric Newby Round Ireland in Low Gear It isleopard can change his spots people can t
a
certainly difficult to imagine how anyone who change their basic nature, proverb
is in any way infirm, and some of the pilgrims
who make the climb are literally on their last less
legs, can reach the top. in less than no time very quickly or soon. 
take to your legs: see take to your heels at informalHEEL. lesser
legend the lesser evil or the lesser of two evils the
a legend in their own lifetime a very famous less harmful or unpleasant of two bad
or notorious person. choices or possibilities. 
legit
go legit begin to behave honestly after a let
period of illegal activity, informal let someone down gently seek to give
someone bad news in a way that avoids
Legit was originally a late 19th-century causing them too much distress or
theatrical abbreviation meaning a humiliation. legitimate actor , that is, one who acts in
legitimate theatre conventional or serious let it drop or rest say or do no more about a
drama. matter or problem. 
let it go or pass choose not to react to anaction or remark. leisure
let off steam: see STEAM. lady or man or gentleman of leisure a
person who does not need to earn a living let yourself go act in an unrestrained or
or whose time is free from obligations to uninhibited way. neglect yourself or
others. your appearance; become careless orlemon untidy in your habits. 
the answer a lemon the response or let or hindrance obstruction or impediment. formal
outcome is unsatisfactory, informalLet in its Middle English sense of
A lemon here is used to represent a bad, something that impedes is now archaic and unsatisfactory, or disappointing thing, rarely occurs outside this phrase, in which it
possibly because the lemon is the least duplicates the sense of hindrance. It is,
valuable symbol that can be achieved by however, used in sports such as badminton
playing a fruit machine. and tennis. 
hand someone a lemon pass off a 1999 Marion Shoard A Right to Roam Citizens
substandard article as good; swindle can claim routes as new public paths on the
someone. grounds that they have been used without let
or hindrance for at least twenty years. 
lend let rip: see P. 
lend an ear or your ears listen to someone let slip: see SLIP. 
sympathetically or attentively. let something drop or fall casually reveal a
lend your name to something allow yourself piece of information. 
to be publicly associated with something. 
letterLenten a dead letter: see DEAD. 
Lenten fare meagre rations that do nota man or woman of letters a scholar orinclude meat. 
writer. 
Lentenfareisliterallyfoodappropriated !
to the letter with adherence to every detail. 
Lent, the Christian season of fasting between Ash Wednesday and Easter Saturday in The French equivalent of this phrase is au 
commemoration of Jesus forty days of ! pied de la lettre, which has been used in
fasting in the wilderness. English since the late 18th century. 
level 172level flip your lid: see FLIP. 
do your level best do your utmost; make all keep a or the lid on keep an emotion or
possible efforts. process from going out of control. keep
a level playing field a situation in which something secret, informal
everyone has a fair and equal chance of put the or a lid on put a stop to. informal
succeeding. 1996 Observer Nothing sfinal. haven put the
1998 Times Most damagingly, the Brussels- lid on anything. 
centred concept of the level playingfield had put the tin lid on be the culmination of a
also proved a wonderfully convenient alibi for series of acts or events that makes things
protectionist lobbies. unbearable. British informal
on the level honest and truthful, informal 1999 Chris Dolan Ascension Day Mum found she
was pregnant a month before the wedding,
liberty then Dad put the tin lid on it by getting himself
take liberties behave in an unduly familiar laid off. 
manner towards a person. treat take or lift the lid off or lift the lid on
something freely, without strict reveal unwelcome secrets about, informal
faithfulness to the facts or to an original. 
take the liberty venture to do something lie
without first asking permission. give the lie to something serve to show that
something previously stated or believed to
licence be the case is not true. 
licence to print money a very lucrative tell a lie or that a lie an expression used
commercial activity, typically one to immediately correct yourself when you
perceived as requiring little effort. realize that you have made an incorrect
remark, informallick let sleeping dogs lie: see SLEEPING. 
at a lick at a fast pace, informal let something lie take no action regarding a
a lick and a promise a hasty performance of controversial or problematic matter. 
a task, especially of cleaning something. lie in state of the corpse of a person of
informal national importance be laid in a public
2001 Andrew Hare Green Eyes Trying toplace of honour before burial. 
scrub my teeth was just as disastrous as before,
washing the face was no more than a lick and a lie like a trooper tell lies constantly and
promise but it would have to do. flagrantly. Compare with swear like a
lick someone boots be excessively trooper at SWEAR. 
obsequious towards someone, especially to lie through your teeth or in your throat tell
gain favour. an outright lie without remorse, informal
lick someone or something into shape: see live a lie lead a life that conceals your true
SHAPE. nature or circumstances. 
lick your lips or chops look forward to nail a lie: see NAIL. 
something with eager anticipation. 
1997 Guardian Headhunting agencies licked lies
their chops at the prospect of the fat as far as in me lies to the best of my power. 
placement fees. how the land lies: see LAND. lick your wounds retire to recover your
strength or confidence after a defeat or life
humiliating experience. do anything for a quiet life make any
concession to avoid being disturbed. lid the facts of life: see FACT. 
blow the lid off remove means of restraint for dear or your life as if or in order to
and allow something to get out of control. escape death. 
informal 1992 Independent made for the life raft and
1995 Daily Express Fleiss was taken to court on
prostitution charges and threatened to blow hung on for dear life. 
the lid off Hollywood by revealing names of all for the life of me however hard try; even if
her superstar clients. my life depended on it. informal173 light
1998 Robert Newman Manners cannot for the to save your life even if your life were to
life of me think what the name of the lead
singer was. depend on it. 
walk of life: see WALK. frighten the life out of terrify. 
get a life start living a fuller or more within an inch of your life: see INCH. 
interesting existence, informal lifeline
1997J-17 All anybody seems to be talking
throw a lifeline to or throw someone a
about today is school. These people need to get
a life. lifeline provide someone with a means ofescaping from a difficult situation. 
large as life of a person conspicuously
present, informal lifetime
This expression was originally used of a lifetime of a chance or experience such
literally, with reference to the size of a statue as does not occur more than once in a
or portrait relative to the original: in the mid ; person life; exceptional. 
18th century Horace Walpole described a
painting as being as large as the life. The lift
humorous mid 19th-century elaboration of
lift or stir a finger or hand make the
the expression, large as life and twice as
natural, used by Lewis Carroll and others, is
slightest effort to do something, especially
still sometimes found; it is attributed to the
to help someone. 
Canadian humorist T. C. Haliburton 1796- 1992 Daily Telegraph If the public does not care
1865. much for the interests of the press, it will not
lift a finger to save a politician from sexual
larger than life of a person attracting embarrassment. 
attention because their appearance orbehaviour is more flamboyant than that of light
ordinary people, of a thing seeming be light on be rather short of. 
disproportionately important. be light on your feet be quick or nimble. 
1996 Face feel that Keith from The Prodigy
has been your best cover this year—he is go out like a light fall asleep or lose
London, in your face, loud and larger than life. consciousness suddenly, informal
life and limb life and all bodily faculties. hide your light under a bushel: see 
1993 Vanity Fair Castro is particularly irked by in the light of drawing knowledge or
the bad press Cuba gets concerning... the information from; with regard to. 
rafters who risk life and limb to get to Florida. 1990 Times Education Supplement Proposals
the life and soul of the party a person whose to build problem-solving into all A-level
subjects may have to be re-examined in the
vivacity and sociability makes a partylight of new research commissioned by the
enjoyable. Government. 
life in the fast lane an exciting and eventful light at the end of the tunnel a long-awaited
lifestyle, especially a wealthy one. informal indication that a period of hardship or
a matter of life and death a matter of vital adversity is nearing an end. 
importance. light a fire under someone: see FIRE. 
a new lease of life: see LEASE. light the or a fuse or touchpaper do
not on your life said to emphasize your something that creates a tense or exciting
refusal to comply with some request. situation. 
informal The image here is of lighting a fuse
see life gain a wide experience of the world, attached to gunpowder, fireworks, etc. in
order to cause an explosion. A touchpaper,
especially its more pleasurable aspects. ! which is used in the same way as a fuse, is a take your life in your hands risk being twist of paper impregnated with saltpetre to killed. make it burn slowly. 
this is the life an expression of contentment 1998 Times The rejection of global capitalism
with your present circumstances. may light a touchpaper in all those countries
1995 Nicholas Whittaker Platform Souls This is battered by the crisis. 
the life, nothing to do but read and look out of
the window. the light of your life a much-loved person. 
to the life exactly like the original. make light or little of treat as unimportant. 
lightning 174
1990 Vanity Fair Ian says they still hope to A limb here is the projecting branch of a marry someday, and tries to make light of : tree. A related expression is go out on a limb, 
their non-wedding. meaning take a risk or act boldly and
make light work of accomplish a task uncompromisingly. 
quickly and easily. 
1991 Times Education Supplement don always
punch someone lights out beat someone want to go out on a limb, or sound confron up. tational byflatlysaying that the child has done
this or that. 
lightning tear someone limb from limb violently
lightning never strikes twice the same dismember someone. 
calamity never occurs twice. limit
This expression refers to the popular be the limit be intolerably troublesome or
belief that lightning never strikes the same
irritating, informalspot twice. 1983 Penelope Lively Perfect Happiness It sline
nasty, isn it?... Having to go to the same the bottom line the final reality; the
airport. Though in a way you can help important conclusion. 
thinking well lightning never strikes
Literally, the bottom line is the final total itwice. 
in an account or balance sheet. 
like lightning or like greased lightning
very quickly. 1991 Sun The bottom line is that we would
rather have Venables and Sugar than Gazza,like Maxwell and Scholar. 
like it or not used to indicate that someone come down to the line of a race be closely
has no choice in a matter, informal fought right until the end. 
1998 New Scientist Like it or not, people expect come or bring someone or something into
more honesty from those who claim to be on line conform or cause someone or
the side of the environment. something to conform. 
like —, like — as — is, so is —. do a line with someone have a regular
Two familiar sayings which appear in this romantic or sexual relationship with
form are like father, like son, recorded in this someone. Irish & New Zealand informal
form from the early 17th century onwards, end of the line the point at which further
and like mother, like daughter. effort is unproductive or you can go no
1982 Anita Desai A Village by the Sea Did he further. 
teach you to tell me that—that rogue, your get a line on learn something about, informal
father? Like father, like daughter. A family full 1939 Raymond Chandler The Big Sleep was
of liars, no-goods. trying to get a line on you, sure. 
the likes of a similar type of person or thing. lay or put it on the line speak frankly. 
informal
1989 Charles Shaar Murray Crosstown Traffic draw a line in the sand state that you have
They specialized in an odd combination of reached a point beyond which you will not
funk workouts and soulish adaptations of folk- go rock hits by the likes of James Taylor and the the line of least resistance: see RESISTANCE. 
Doobie Brothers. 
line your pocket or pockets make money,likely usually by dishonest means. 
a likely story used to express disbelief of an out of line behaving in a way that breaks the
account or excuse. rules or is considered disreputable orinappropriate. 
lily toe the line: see TOE. gild the lily: see GILD. linen
limb wash your dirty linen in public: see A 
life and limb: see LIFE. lion
out on a limb Qisolated or stranded, a lion in the way a danger or obstacle,
without support. especially an imaginary one. literary
175 liveO This expression developed from a biblical ;
phrase in Proverbs 22:13: The slothful man
live
saith, There is a lion without, shall be slain inlive and breathe something be extremely
the streets. interested in or enthusiastic about a
particular subject or activity; spend a great
the lion den a demanding, intimidating, or deal of your time pursuing a particular
unpleasant place or situation. interest. 
live and learn used, especially in spokenthe lion mouth a place of great peril. 
English, to acknowledge that a fact is new
the lion share the largest part of something. to you. 
1998 Times Rich countries generally seize the 1998 Barbara Kingsolver The Poisonwood Bible
lion share of trade. A man who leaves his wife for his mistress is
throw someone to the lions cause someone no catch, was sorry to find out. Well, live
to be in an extremely dangerous or and learn
unpleasant situation. live and let live you should tolerate the
n ancient Rome, Christians and other opinions and behaviour of others so that
religious or politica issidents were thrown they will similarly tolerate your own. 
to the lions in the arena to be killed. On its first appearance in English in 1622, this was referred to as a Dutch proverb Leuen 
lip ende laeten leuen. 
bite your lip repress an emotion; stifle live by your wits: see WIT. 
laughter or a retort. live in the past have old-fashioned or
curl your lip raise a corner of your upper lip outdated ideas and attitudes. dwell on or
to show contempt; sneer. reminisce at length about past events. 
hang on someone lips listen attentively to live it up spend your time in an extremely
someone. enjoyable or extravagant way. informal
lick or smack your lips look forward to live a lie: see LIE. 
something with relish; show your live off the fat of the land: see FAT. 
satisfaction. live off the land: see LAND. 
pass someone lips be eaten, drunk, or live out of a suitcase live or stay somewhere
spoken by someone. on a temporary basis and with only a
pay lip service to something express limited selection of your belongings,
approval of or support for something typically because your occupation requires
without taking any significant action. 
a great deal of travelling. 
1998 New Scientist Green organisations are
having great difficulty maintaining their live over the shop live on the premises
membership, and politicians pay lip service to where you work. 
environmental problems. live your own life follow your own plans and
someone lips are sealed a person is obligedprinciples; be independent of others. 
to keep a secret. live rough live and sleep outdoors as a
lists consequence of having no proper home. 
enter the lists issue or accept a challenge. 
live to fight another day survive a certain
l medieval times, the lists were the experience or ordeal. 
enclosed area in which knights fought each This idea, found in the works of the Greek other in tournaments. comic playwright Menander, is expressed in
the English proverbial rhyme He who fights
and runs away Lives to fight another day. 
little live to tell the tale survive a dangerous
make little of: see make light of at LIGHT. experience and be able to tell others about
quite the little — used when ironically or it. 
condescendingly recognizing that where you live at, to, or in the right, vital, or
someone has a particular quality or most vulnerable spot. North American
accomplishment. 2002 New York Times The movies hit them
1995 John Banville Athena She was being quite where they live—in their own state of
the little home-maker, all bustle and frown. desperation and doubt. 
lively 176lively loath
look lively: see LOOK. nothing loath: see NOTHING. 
lively as a grig: see merry as a grig at GRIG. lock
living have a lock on have an unbreakable hold or
total control over. North American informal
be the living proof that or of show by
your or something existence and Lock is here used in the sense of a hold in qualities that something is the case. ! wrestling that prevents an opponent from
live on borrowed time: see BORROWED. moving a limb. 

in or within living memory within or 1974 Paul Erdman Silver Bears He would sooner
during a time that is remembered by see the whole bank go down the drain... than
get beaten by us. Unless we develop an evenpeople still alive. 
better lock on him—and that won be easy. 
the living image of an exact copy or likeness
lock horns engage in conflict. 
of. 
The image here is of two bulls fighting
load head-to-headwiththeirhorns. Boththeliteral get a load of used to draw attention to andfigurativesensesofthephraseoriginated in the USA, in the mid 19th century. someone or something, informal
1994 Quentin Tarantino Pulp Fiction It legal to lock, stock, and barrel including everything;
carry it, but... get a load of this, alright—if the
cops stop you, it illegal for them to search completely. 
you. Lock, stock, and barrel refers literally to
get or have a load on become drunk. US the complete mechanism of a firearm. 
informal
load the dice against or in favour of under lock and key securely locked up. 
someone put someone at a disadvantage locker
or advantage. go to Davy Jones locker: see DAVY JONES S
1995 Maclean What global warming has LOCKER. done is load the dice in favor of warmer than-normal seasons and extreme climatic a shot in the locker: see SHOT. 
events. take a or the load off your feet sit or lie log
down. easy as falling off a log: see EASY. 
take a load off someone mind bring loggerheads
someone relief from anxiety. at loggerheads in violent dispute ordisagreement. 
loaded
loaded for bear: see BEAR. This expression is possibly a use of
loggerhead in the late 17th-century sense of a long-handled iron instrument for heating loaf liquids and tar ; the tool was perhaps alsohalf a loaf: see HALF. used as a weapon. 
loaves and fishes personal profit as a motive
for religious profession or public service. loins
This idiom developed from a biblical gird your loins: see G D. 
passage in John 6:26: Jesus answered them
and said, Verily, verily, say unto you, Ye seekloiter
me, not because ye saw the miracles, but loiter with intent stand or wait around with
because ye did eat of the loaves, and were the intention of committing an offence. 
filled. British
use your loaf use your common sense. British This is a legal phrase which derives from
informal an 1891 Act of Parliament; it is also used
figuratively and humorously of anyone who This expression probably comes from loaf is waiting around for some unspecified
of bread, rhyming slang for head. purpose. 177 loopLombard longbow
all Lombard Street to a China orange great draw the longbow make exaggerated claims
wealth against one ordinary object; virtual or statements, dated
certainty, datedThe longbowwasthe national weapon of Lombard Street in London was originally England from the 14th century until the
occupied by bankers from Lombardy, and it introduction of firearms, and prowess in its
still contains a number of London principal use was highly prized. The phrase has been
banks. This idiom dates from the early 19th used in this metaphorical sense since the mid !
century, but the use of a China orange to 17th century. 
mean a worthless thing is recorded earlier. look
London look before you leap you shouldn act
a London particular a dense fog formerly without first considering the possible
affecting London, dated consequences or dangers, proverb
This expression originated in Charles look daggers: see DAGGER. 
Dickens Bleak House 1853. look down your nose at despise, informal
look lively used to tell someone to be quick in
lonesome doing something, informalby or on your lonesome all alone, informal 
A variant of this phrase is look alive, but
long this is now rather dated. 
by a long chalk: see CHALK. look someone in the eye or face look
by a long shot: see SHOT. directly at someone without showing
in the long run or term over a long period of embarrassment, fear, or shame. 
time; eventually. look someone up and down scrutinize
1997 New Scientist But as the economist
someone carefully. 
Maynard Keynes pointed out, in the long run
we are al ead. look the other way deliberately ignore
wrongdoing by others. the long and the short of it all that can or
need be said. 1998 EconomistThe Greek government looked
the other way as lorries... switched
1999 Tim Lott White City Blue His mother takes documents the minute they crossed the
a lot of looking after, his wage is worse than border. 
Nodge  , and the long and short of it is he
hasn got a pot to piss in. look sharp be quick. 1953 Margaret Kennedy Troy Chimneys long in the tooth rather old. 
had... begun an idleflirtationwith Maria,
This phrase was originally used of horses, ... then, perceiving that should be
referring to the way their gums recede with caught if did not look sharp, kept out of
age. her way. 
long time no see it a long time since we last lookout
met used as a greeting, informal be on the lookout Qkeep searching for
someone or something that is wanted,
This idiom developed as a humorous
imitation of broken English spoken by a be alert to danger or trouble. 
1 Native American. The word lookout, which originated in
naval and military contexts, was first applied, not be long for this world have only a short in the late 17th century, to sentries or other
time to live. people employed to keep watch. The sense
1996 Frank McCourt Angela Ashes Mrs. of the action of keeping watch , as used in
Finucane... says she not long for this world this expression, dates from the mid 18th
and the more Masses said for her soul the century. 
better she ll feel. not by a long chalk: see CHALK. loop
not by a long shot: see SHOT. 
in or out of the loop aware or unaware of
over the long haul over an extended period information known to only a limited
of time, chiefly North American number of people, informal
loose 1781998 Times An insider suggests to a favoured,
helpful journalist that the said minister is out losing
of the loop and on the skids. a losing battle a struggle that is bound to end
throw or knock someone for a loopin failure. 
surprise or astonish someone; catch lost
someone off guard. North American all is not lost used to suggest that there is still
some chance of success or recovery. loose be lost or at a loss for words be so
hang or stay loose be relaxed; refrain surprised, confused, or upset that you
from taking anything too seriously. cannot think what to say. 
informal be lost in the shuffle: see SHUFFLE. 
a loose cannon a unpredictable person or be lost on someone fail to influence or be
thing likely to cause unintentional noticed or appreciated by someone. 
damage. 1990 Katherine Frank Emily Brontë Charlotte  
A loose cannon was originally a cannon lovely surroundings and the steady unfurling
that had broken loose from its fastening or of one glorious summer day after the next
mounting, an accident especially dangerous were lost on her. 
on wooden ships of war. give someone up for lost stop expecting that
a missing person will be found alive. loose end a lost soul: see SOUL. 
at a loose end having nothing to do; not make up for lost time do something faster or
knowing what to do. more often in order to compensate for not
A North American variant of this
having done it quickly or often enough
expression is at loose ends. before. lot
lord all over the lot in a state of confusion or
Lord of the Flies the Devil. disorganization. US informal
This expression is often used with fall to someone lot become someone task
allusive reference to the title of the 1954 or responsibility. 
novel by William Golding 1911-93, in
which a group of schoolboys marooned throw in your lot with decide to ally yourself
on an uninhabited tropical island revert closely with and share the fate of a person
to savagery and primitive ritualistic or group. behaviour. 
Both this and the previous idiom come! from the process of deciding something by
drawing or casting lots. lorry
fall off a lorry: see FALL. 1992 Michael Medved Hollywood vs. America
Yuppie physician Michael J. Fox decides to give
lose up his dreams of glitz and glory in L. A. and to
throw in his lot with the lovable locals. 
lose face: see FACE. lose sleep worry. love
lose your mind or your marbles become for the love of Mike used to accompany an
insane or irrational, informal exasperated request or to express dismay. 
British informallose your rag: see RAG. 
lose your shirt: see SHIRT. Mike is perhaps used here as a generic
name for an Irishman; compare with mickey 
lose your touch: see TOUCH. in take the mickey out of at MICKEY. 
lose your or the way no longer have a clear
idea of your purpose or motivation in an love me, love my dog if you love someone,
activity or business. you must accept everything about them,
even their faults, proverb
loser love young dream Qttie relationship of
be on or on to a loser be involved in a young lovers, the object of someone  
course of action that is bound to fail. love. a man regarded as a perfect lover. 
179 lyricalnot for love or money not in any lucky used to say that someone wishes or
circumstances, informal expectations are unlikely to be fulfilled. 
1998 Spectator am told that you cannot get aplasterer for love or money, but that the going lull
rate is a big kiss and £1,000 a week. 
the lull before the storm: see STORM. 
there no or little or not much love lost
between there is mutua islike between lump
two or more people mentioned. 
a lump in the throat a feeling of tightness or
lower dryness in the throat caused by strongemotion, especially grief. 
lower the boom on treat someone
severely, put a stop to an activity, informal take or get your lumps suffer punishment;
be attacked or defeated, informal, chiefly North
It has been suggested that this phrase American
originally meant knocking out an adversary ; 1971 Bernard Malamud The Tenants Now : with one punch in a fight. take my lumps, he thought. Maybe for notsatisfying Mary. 
lower the tone diminish the spirit or moralcharacter of a conversation, place, etc. lunch
Tone here is used to mean the genera lunch meet for hinformal, chiefly North
character or attitude of a conversation, place, American
piece of writing, etc. ladies who lunch: see LADY. 
lower your sights: see raise your sights at out to lunch: see OUT. 
SIGHT. 
there no such thing as a free lunch you
never get something for nothing; any
lowest benefit received has eventually to be paid
the lowest of the low those regarded as the for. 
most immoral or socially inferior of all. 1996 Washington Times Europeans are now
1995 Nicholas Whittaker Tlatform Souls And learning some hard facts of life about
fare dodgers, well, they re the lowest of the socialized medicine: there no such thing as a
low, and should be strung up. free lunch. 
luck lurch
as luck would have it used to indicate the leave someone in the lurch leave an
fortuitousness of a situation. associate or friend abruptly and without
1994 Beryl Gilroy Sunlight on Sweet Water As assistance or support when they are in a
luck would have it, one day they met in the difficult situation. 
door of the rum shop. 
Lurch as a noun meaning a state of
the luck of the draw the outcome of chance discomfiture dates from the mid 16th
rather than something you can control. ! century but it is now used only in this idiom. 
the luck of the Irish very good luck. 
1987 Eileen Dunlop The House on the Hill What
make your own luck be successful through have Gilmores ever done but leave her in the
your own efforts and opportunism. lurch? Poor Jane, she just can run the risk of
ride your luck let favourable events take being hurt again. 
their course without taking undue risks. 
try your luck at something do something lying
that involves risk or luck, hoping to succeed. take something lying down accept an
1964 Mary Stewart This Rough Magic finally insult or injury without attempting
decided, after three years of juvenile leads in retaliation. 
provincial rep that it was time to try my luck in 1989 Shimmer Chinodya Harvest of Thorns
She boasting in front of me, laughingLondon. 
at me for being weak. Today she ll know
your luck is in or out you are fortunate or not going to take it lying down any
unfortunate on a particular occasion. longer. lucky lyrical
you, he, etc. will be lucky or should be so wax lyrical about or over talk in an
lyrical 180
effusive or enthusiastic way about moon monthly increase and decrease
something. waxing and waning. 
Wax from Old English weaxan was used 1998 New Scientist Even as they wax lyrical
to mean increase in size right through until about the perils of a changing climate, Clinton
early modern English, but since then it has and Gore are presiding over the most massive
been superseded in all general contexts by expansion of oil exploration and drilling
grow. It now survives only in certain since... the Trans-Alaska Pipeline twenty
expressions, especially with reference to the years ago. 
Mmadjective meaning of strength or force
mad exerted to the full , it is a very ancient usage:
mad as a hatter or a March hare completely maegenstrengo occurs in the Anglo-Saxon
crazy, informal epic Beowulf. 
In this expression, a hatter refers to Lewis ;
Carroll character, the Mad Hatter, in 4ce majority
Adventures in Wonderland 1865. It is
thought that hatters suffered from the oin the great majority: see JOIN. 
effects of mercury poisoning because of the the silent majority: see SILENT. 
fumes arising from the use of mercurousnitrate in the manufacture of felt hats. The
March hare version refers to the way hares
leap about during the breeding season. make
make a beeline for: see BEELINE. mad as a cut snake crazy or eccentric. 
make the cut: see CUT. Australian informalmake someone day make an otherwise
ordinary or dul ay pleasingly memorablemadding
far from the madding crowd secluded or for someone. 
removed from public notice. make a day or night of it devote a whole
day or night to an activity, typically an
The phrase was originally used in Thomas Gray Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard enjoyable one. 
1751. It is now better known as the title of make do manage with the limited or
one of Thomas Hardy novels. inadequate means available. 
This phrase can be used alone or in make 
do and mend, a UK slogan from the 1940s. madness
that way madness lies it is ill-advised to make like pretend to be; imitate. North American
pursue a particular course of action as it informal
will cause distress or anxiety. 1939 John Steinbeck The Grapes of Wrath This
This phrase is a quotation from King Lear, 
rich fella... makes like he poor. 
taken from the speech in which Lear shies make or break be the factor which decides
away from contemplating the ingratitude of whether something will succeed or fail. 
his daughters Regan and Goneril. 
A variant of this phrase, found chiefly in
British English, is make or mar. The use of
maggot make together with mar is recorded from the act the maggot behave in a foolishly playful early 15th century, but since the mid 19th
way. Irish informal century break has become more common. 
1998 Your Garden Neighbours can makemagic or break a home and there certainly
a magic carpet: see CARPET. no keeping up with the Jones mentalityhere. 
magnitude on the make intent on gain, typically in a
of the first magnitude: see of the first order rather unscrupulous way. looking for a
at FIRST. sexual partner, informal
put the make on make sexual advances to. main North American informal
by main force through sheer strength. 1993 Anne River Siddons Hill Towns Put the
make on you, did she, Joe? should haveMain derives from the Old English
warned you. Past a certain blood alcohol level
j word maegen meaning physical force. As an jYolie gets snuggly. 
maker 182maker the man in the moon the imagined
meet your maker die. humorous or euphemisticlikeness of a face seen on the surface
of a full moon, used, especially in
This expression alludes to the Christian comparisons, to refer to someone
belief that, after death, the soul goes to be regarded as out of touch with real life. 
judged by God, its creator. 01991 Sight & Sound You thought... you
could mention even the most famous classic
films as reference points in script meetingsmaking and not be looked at like the man in the moon. 
be the making of someone ensure some- the man in or on the street an ordinary
one success or favourable development. person, usually with regard to their
opinions, or as distinct from an expert. malice
malice aforethought the intention to kill or A specifically British variation this
harm which is held to distinguish unlawful expression is the man on the Clapham
killing from murder. omnibus see below. 
man of the cloth a clergyman. mammon
the mammon of unrighteousness wealth ill- onathan Swift used doth as an informal used or ill-gained. term for the clerical profession in the early
18th century, but it was earlier applied to
This biblical expression comes from Luke several other occupations for which 16:9: And say unto you, Make to yourselves distinctive clothing was worn, g. the legal
friends of the mammon of unrighteousness; or military professions. 
that, when ye fail, they may receive you into
everlasting habitations. Mammon ultimately man of God a clergyman. a holy man or
comes from Hebrew mâmôn meaning saint. 
money or wealth. In early use, it was used toa man of letters: see LETTER. 
refer to the devil of covetousness; it later
was used as the personification of wealth man of the moment a man of importance at
regarded as an idol or an evil influence. a particular time. 
man of straw or straw man a person
compared to an effigy stuffed with straw; aman sham. a sham argument set up to be
as — as the next man as — as the average defeated, usually as a means of avoiding
person. having to tackle an opponent real
1998 Tom Clancy Rainbow Six like red meat as arguments. 
much as the next man. 01991 Past b Present By making the
be your own man or woman: see OWN. representativeness of the case-studies into the
every man for himself: see EVERY. crucial issue, Rubinstein is erecting a straw
man which he can easily demolish without
every man has his price: see PRICE. addressing the basic criticisms of his sources
man about town a fashionable male socialite. and methodology. 
man and boy throughout life from youth. a man of the world: see WORLD. 
The Scottish poet William Dunbar used the man on the Clapham omnibus the
the phrase oa ti man andad in the early 16th average man, especially with regard to his
century, but the modern usage follows opinions. British
Shakespeare Hamlet have been sexton
here, man and boy, thirty years. This expression is attributed to the
English judge Lord Bowen 1835-94, who
a man for all seasons a man who is ready to used it as a metaphor for any ordinary
cope with any contingency and whose reasonable person—such as a juror is
behaviour is always appropriate to every expected to be. Clapham is a district in south London. occasion. 
Robert Whittington applied this man best friend an affectionate or
description to the English statesman and humorous way of referring to a dog. 
scholar Sir Thomas More 1478-1535, and it a man man a man whose personality is such
was used by Robert Bolt as the title of his 1960 j play about More. 
that he is more popular and at ease with
other men than with women. 183 march
T expression was apparently first used in George Du Maurier story The Martianmanse
1897, where the man man is defined as a son or daughter of the manse the child of a
good comrade par excellence, a frolicsome minister, especially a Presbyterian. 
chum, a rollicking boon-companion, a
olly pal. A man woman, which dates from many
the early 20th century, is a woman who is be too or one too many for outwit or baffle. 
more at ease with men than with other
have one too many become slightly drunk. 
women. 
many the — used to indicate that
1991 Men Health Masculinity used to be something happens often. 
simple to define. If you had hair on your 2000 Taxi News Many the happy hour ve
chest and a deep voice, and belonged to a club spent listening to cabbies thrash that one out. 
that excluded women, you were masculine,
or, as was the phrase of the time, a man map
man. 
all over the map see all over the place at ALL. 
man to man in a direct and frank way
between two men; openly and honestly. off the map of a place very distant or
remote. Compare with off the beaten
men in grey suits powerful men within an
organization who exercise their influence track at BEATEN. 
or authority anonymously. put something on the map make something
men in white coats psychiatrists or prominent or important. 
psychiatric workers used to imply that wipe something off the map obliterate
someone is mad or mentally unbalanced. something totally. 
humorous marble1995 Economist Mrs Thatcher was removed
lose your marbles go insane; become
from Ten Downing Street by men in grey suits. 
udging by her hyperthyroidic performance irrational or senile, informal
this week, it would now take men in white Marbles as a term for a person mental
coats. faculties probably originated as early 20th separate orsort out the men from the boys century American slang. The underlying
show or prove which people in a group are reference is apparently to the children  
truly competent, brave, or mature. game played with multicoloured glass balls. 
1968 House b Garden The Dry Martini... is a 1998 Spectator At least, that is how recall the
drink that will quickly separate the men from event, but am losing my marbles. 
the boys and the girls from their principles. 
pick up your marbles and go home
twelve good men and true: see TWELVE. withdraw petulantly from an activity after
having suffered a setback, informal, chiefly US
mangle
put someone through the mangle: see put The image here is of a child who refuses
sulkily to continue playing the game of
someone through the wringer atmarbles. WRINGER. manner March
in a manner of speaking in some sense; so to mad as a March hare: see mad as a hatter at
speak. MAD. Manner of speaking is recorded from the mid 16th century; compare with French façon imarch
de parler, which has been in use in English march to the beat of a different tune or
since the early 19th century. drum or drummer consciously adopt a
different approach or attitude to the
to the manner born naturally at ease in a majority of people; be unconventional. 
specified way of life, job, or situation. informal
This comes from Shakespeare Hamlet: The version with drummer comes
though am native here And to the manner ultimately from Henry David Thoreau  
born. Punning on this expression, to the Walden 1854: If a man does not keep pace manor born is used to refer to someone who with his companions, perhaps it is because he has aristocratic origins. hears a different drummer. mare 184
1997 New Scientist In formulating his ideas This idiom, which datesfrom the mid 20th about the composition of the fundamental century, derives from the world of horse
building blocks of matter... Sternglass has racing. The card is a race card, the list of
marched to the beat of an entirely different runners at a race meeting, so to mark
drum. someone card is to give them tips forpossible winners. mare
a mare nest a wonderfu iscovery which the mark of Cain the stigma of a murderer;
proves or will prove to be illusory. a sign of infamy. 
A mare nest is here being used to According to the book of Genesis, God
symbolize something that does not exist, as placed a mark on Cain after the murder of his horses do not make nests. The phrase is first brother Abel, originally as a sign that he
recorded in the late 16th century, as is the should not be killed or harmed; this was later variant a horse nest, although the latter is taken to identify him as a murderer Genesis 
now no longer in use. 4:15. 
mark time of troops march on the spot
marines without moving forward. pass your time
tell that to the marines or the horse in routine activities until a more
marines a scornful expression of interesting opportunity presents itself. 
incredulity. mark something with a white stone: seeWHITE. This saying may have originated in a
remark made by Charles II, recommending near or close to the mark almost correct or
that unlikely tales should be referred to accurate. 
sailors who, from their knowledge of distant
places, might be the people best qualified to The mark this and the two following
udge their truthfulness. Horse marines, idioms is a target or goal. 
dating from the early 19th century, were an
imaginary cavalry corps, soldiers mounted on off or wide of the mark a long way away
horseback on board ship being a humorous from an intended target. incorrect or
image of ineptitude or of people out of their inaccurate. 
natural element. In 1823 Byron noted that
That wil for the marines, but the sailors on the mark correct or accurate. 
won believe it was an old saying , and the on your marks used to instruct competitors
following year Walter Scott used Tell that toin a race to prepare themselves in the
the marines—the sailors won believe it! in
his novel Redgauntlet. correct starting position. 
up to the mark Oof the required standard. 
1998 Times Truth is the issue, say the 0 of a person as healthy or cheerful as
apologists, not the grope. You can tell that to usual. the marines. The issue is the grope. 
marketmark be in the market for wish to buy. 
be quick or slow off the mark be fast or a drug on the market: see DRUG. 
slow in responding to a situation orunderstanding something. marriage
marriage of convenience a marriage
The mark here is the line or marker concluded to achieve a practical purpose. 
from which a competitor starts a race, as is
also the case in get off the mark and on 1 This expression was used by Joseph
your marks. Addison in the early 18th century, translating the French manage de convenance, which
a black mark: see B A K. has itself been current in English sincethe mid get off the mark get started. 19th century. 

leave or make its or your or a mark have a 1949 George Bernard Shaw Buoyant Billions
lasting or significant effect. The proportion of happy love marriages to
make your mark become famous and happy marriages of convenience has never
been counted. successful. 
mark someone card give someone marrow
information, informal to the marrow to your innermost being. 
185 meaning
Marrow is the soft, fatty substance found jin the cavities of bones. max
to the max to the highest degree possible. 
1994 Maurice Gee Crime Story Moral informal
corruption, the lawyer said. Men who are
greedy to the marrow of their bones. McCoy
the real McCoy the real thing; the genuine
marry article, informalmarry money marry a rich person, informal
The origin is of this phrase is unknown,
but it appears in the form the real Mackay in mat a letter by Robert Louis Stevenson in 1883. 
go to the mat vigorously engage in an McCoy glossed as genuine liquor in a 1930 argument or dispute, typically on behalf of edition of the American Mercury. 
a particular person or cause. 1992 Jeff Torrington Swing Hammer Swing!
The mat referred to is the thick mat in a How you know the armour real? Oh, m
gym on which wrestling is practised. sure it the real McCoy. 
1924 P. G. Wodehouse Leave it to Psmithmeal
I... heard... you and Aunt Constance going to
make a meal of treat a task or occurrencethe mat about poor old Phyllis. 
with more attention or care than
on the mat being reprimanded by someone necessary, especially for effect. British informal
in authority, informal 1961 Colin Willock Death in Covert Dyson... 
This idiom is a military reference: the was making a meal of everything. He had
orderly room mat was where a soldier carefully paced the distance... He had stuck
accused of some misdemeanour would stand sticks in the ground. 
before the commanding officer. meanmatch the golden mean: see GOLDEN. 
meet your match encounter your equal in mean business be in earnest. 
strength or ability. 1992 New York Times The protest is a matter of
principle... and also a necessary act of
the whole shooting match: see SHOOTING. assertiveness by the delegates to show they
mean business. Matilda
mean to say really admit or intend to say. 
waltz or walk Matilda carry a bundle of
1977 Jennifer Johnston Shadows on our Skin your personal possessions as you travel the mean to say, Joe Logan, where are you if you
roads. Australian can resist putting a small white tube of
The name Matilda was one of a number of !
poison into your mouth every half an hour?
names given to the swag or pack carried by a means to an end a thing that is not valued
bushmen in Australia. The expression was or important in itself but is useful in
famously used by A. B. Banjo Paterson achieving an aim. 
1864-1941 in his 1903 song Waltzing
Matilda. End and means are compared or
contrasted in several proverbial sayings,
for example the end justifies the means
matter see END and he who wills the end wills
a matter of form a point of correct the means. procedure. 
no mean — a very good —. 
Matthew This expression was famously used by St
the Matthew principle the principle that ! Paul: a .. a Jew of Tarsus... a citizen of no !
more will be given to those who are already mean city Acts 21:39. provided for. 
1990 LA. Style Surviving the rise and fall of art
This phrase stems from the gospel trends is no mean trick. 
passage: Unto every one that hath shall be
given, and he shall have abundance meaningMatthew 25:29. 
not know the meaning of the word behave
measure 186as if unaware of the concept referred to orimplied, informalmeet
meet the case be adequate. 
measure meet your eye or ear be visible or
for good measure in addition to what has audible. 
already been done, said, or given. meet someone eye or eyes or gaze look
get or take or have the measure of assess directly at someone. 
or have assessed the character, nature, or meet someone halfway make a compromise
abilities of someone or something. with someone. 
measure your length of a person fall flat on meet your maker: see MAKER. 
the ground, dated meet your match: see MATCH. 
meat meet your Waterloo: see WATERLOO. 
be meat and drink to be a source of great there more to someone or something than
pleasure or encouragement to. meets the eye a person or situation is more
2002 Total Film Sex, conspiracy theories, top complex or interesting than they appear. 
hats and orrible murder, the elements of theack The Ripper story are meat and drink to meeting
film-makers. a meeting of minds an understanding or
dead meat: see DEAD. agreement between people. 
easy meat: see EASY. 
meat and potatoes ordinary but megillah
fundamental things; basic ingredients. the whole megillah something in its
1993 New York Times Mainstream rock acts like entirety, especially a complicated set of
Van Halen and Bruce Springsteen are the meat arrangements or a long-winded story. North
and potatoes of A. O. R. American informal
medal Megillah is the Hebrew word for a scroll the reverse of the medal or shield the
the Jewish Scriptures the Song of Solomon,
opposite view of a matter. Ruth, Lamentations, Ecclesiastes, and Esther appointed to be read in the synagogue onMedes certain important days. 
the law of the Medes and Persians
something which cannot be altered. Melba
This expression refersto Daniel 6:12: The jdo a Melba return from retirement. 
thing is true, according to the law of the
Medes and Persians, which altereth not make several farewell appearances. 
Australian & New Zealand informalThe Australian operatic soprano Nellie
medicine Melba the stage name of Helen Mitchell,
a dose or taste of your own medicine the 1 1861-1931 made repeated farewell 
same bad treatment that you have given to appearances. others. 
The idea of taking or receiving your own melt medicine has been in metaphorical use since melt in the mouth of food be deliriouslythe mid 19th century. 
light or tender and need little or no
1994 Eoin McNamee Resurrection Man Every chewing. 
time you turn on the telly there somepolitician talking the mouth off himself, dose memory
of their own medicine what they want. 
take a trip or walk down memory lane
meek deliberately recall pleasant or sentimentalmemories. 
meek as Moses or a lamb very meek. This expression is a biblical allusion to mend
Numbers 12:3: Now the man Moses was very !mend your fences make peace with ameek. person. 
187 Mickey Finn
This expression originated in the late 19th messenger of ill and Shakespeare Antony 
century in the USA, with reference to a and Cleopatra, The nature of bad news
member of Congress returning to his home infects the teller. 
town to keep in touch with the voters and to !
look after his interests there. Similar notions are conjured up by the saying good fences method
make good neighbours. there is method in someone madness
there is a sensible foundation for what
1994 Louis de Bernières Captain Corelli  
Mandolin He knew assuredly he should go and appears to be foolish or strange behaviour. 
mend his fences with the priest. This expression comes from the scene in
mend your pace go faster; alter your pace to ! Hamlet in which Hamlet feigns madness,
causing Polonius to remark: Though this be match another  . madness, yet there is method in t. 
on the mend improving in health orcondition; recovering. mettle
mentioned be on your mettle be ready or forced to prove
be mentioned in dispatches be commended your ability to cope well with a demanding
for your actions. British situation. 
In official military reports from the front put someone on their mettle of a
line any soldiers who have been responsible demanding situation test someone  
for particular acts of bravery are commended ability to face difficulties in a spirited and
by name. resilient way. 
Originally the same word as metal, mettle 
mercy was no more than a variant spelling that
be thankful or grateful for small mercies be gradually became particularly associated
with figurative uses of the word, meaning
relieved that an unpleasant situation is quality of temperament , and from that
alleviated by minor advantages. natural spirit or courage. These senses
eventually developed so far from the literal
merry senses that it was no longer apparent that
lead someone a merry dance: see DANCE. they were originally the same word. The
merry as a grig: see GRIG. distinctive spellings metal and mettle to
distinguish the two were in use by the early18th century, though not necessarily
mess universally applied until the following
mess with someone head cause someone century. 
to feel frustrated, anxious, or upset. US
informal
sell something for a mess of pottage: see Mexican
POTTAGE. Mexican overdrive the neutral gear position
used when coasting downhill. US informal
message This expression originated in the mid 20th get the message infer an implication from a century, especially in language used by long- remark or action, informa istance truck drivers. 
1993 Isidore Okpewho Tides think he got the
message, because heflashedme a look from
the corner of his eye. mickey
send the right or wrong message make a take the mickey tease or ridicule someone,
significant statement, either implicitly or especially in an unkind or persistent way. 
informal, chiefly British
by your actions. : 0 The origin of this phrase is unknown; take 
messenger or extract the Michael is a humorously
shoot or kill the messenger treat the bearer ! formal variant. 
of bad news as if they were to blame for it. 
Being the bearer of bad tidings has been a Mickey Finn
traditionally thankless task, as indicated in slip someone a Mickey Finn give someone a
Sophocles Antigone, No man loves the
drugged or otherwise adulterated drink. microscope 188
Recorded from the 1920s, this expression Mike
is of unknown origin, but it is sometimes said for the love of Mike: see LOVE. 
to be the name of a notorious Chicago
barkeeper c. 1896-1906. mile
be miles away be lost in thought and so
microscope unaware of what is happening around you. 
under the microscope under critical informal
examination. go the extra mile be especially assiduous in
your attempt to achieve something. 
Midas This origins of this expression can be
the Midas touch the ability to make money traced back to the New Testament injunction out of anything that you undertake. And whosoever shall compel thee to go a
mile, go with him twain Matthew 5:41. The classical legend, Midas was a king of revue song of 1957 by Joyce Grenfell,
Phrygia in Asia Minor who had the power to Ready... To go the extra mile , may have
turn everything he touched into gold. popularized its use. 
a mile a minute very quickly, informalmiddleAs a noun, mile a minute is a popular
the middle of nowhere somewhere very ! nickname for the quick-growing climbing
remote and isolated, informal plant Russian Vine. 
This is one example of severa erogatory expressions concerning rural life as viewed run a mile used to show that someone is
from an urban perspective: compare with frightened by or very unwilling to do
the back of beyond at BACK and in the sticks something, informal
at STICK. 1999 Chris Dolan Ascension Day She ll run a
mile if you contact her direct. my go steer or take a middle course adopt a policy between bit, for you and her, if you do the
which avoids extremes. same for me. see orteil or spot something a mile off
midnight recognize something very easily, informal
burn the midnight oil: see BURN. stand or stick out a mile be very obvious or
incongruous, informal
midstream milk
in midstream Oin the middle of a stream or cry over spilt or spilled milk lament or
river. of an activity or process, especially make a fuss about a misfortune that has
one that is interrupted part-way through happened and that cannot be changed or
its course; unfinished. reversed. milk and honey prosperity and abundance. might
might is right those who are powerful can do This expression alludes to the prosperity
of the Promised Land of Israel in the Bible
what they wish unchallenged, even if their ! Exodus 3:8. 
action is in fact unjustified. 
This was an observation made by both
milk and water feeble, insipid, or mawkish. 
Greek and Latin writers and it was known in : milk the bull or ram engage in an enterprise
this form in English as far back as the early doomed to failure. 
14th century. 
the milk in the coconut a puzzling fact or
with might and main with all your force. circumstance. 
Main derives from the Old English wordthe milk of human kindness care and
maegen meaning physical strength see also compassion for others. 
by main force at MAIN. The use of the two This phrase comes from Macbeth. In Lady : nouns might and main together dates from Macbeth soliloquy on the subject of her
the mid 15th century; main in this sense is no husband character, she remarks: Yet do
longer used in modern English except in this fear thy nature; It is too full the milk of
phrase. human kindness To catch the nearest way. 
189 minutemill have something on your mind be troubled
go or put someone through the mill by the thought of something. 
undergo or cause someone to undergo an in your mind eye in your imagination or
unpleasant experience. mental view. 
run of the mill: see RUN. mind over matter the power of the mind
million asserted over the physical universe; the use
gone a million of a person completely of willpower to overcome physical
defeated or finished. Australian informal problems. 
1976 Australian Sydney Gough gone. Gone a your Ps and Qs be careful to behave
mindmillion. He had it. well and avoid giving offence. 
look or feel like a million dollars of a Various suggestions have been made
person look or feel extremely good. concerning the significance of and Q. One informal obvious one is that a child learning to read or write might have difficulty in distinguishing
between the two tailed letters and q. 
millstone Another is that printers had to be very careful hard as the nether millstone: see HARD. not to confuse the two letters when setting
a millstone round your neck a very severe type. 
impediment or disadvantage. mind the shop be temporarily in charge of
A millstone was a large circular stone used iaffairs. 
to grind corn. The phrase alludes to a methodmind your back or backs used to warn
of executing people by throwing them into inattentive bystanders that someone wants
deep water with a heavy stone attached to
them, a fate believed to have been suffered
to get past, informal
by several early Christian martyrs. not pay someone any mind not pay someone
any attention. North American
mince on someone mind preoccupying someone,
especially in a disquieting way. 
not mince words or matters speak candidly open your mind to be prepared to consider
and directly, especially when criticizing or acknowledge; be receptive to. 
someone or something. 
out of your mind having lost control of
mincemeat your mental faculties; insane, used toexpress a belief in someone foolishness
make mincemeat of defeat decisively or or mental turmoil. suffering from the
easily in a fight, contest, or argument. 
specified condition to a very high degree. informal
informalmind put your mind to something start to
be in or of two minds be unable to decide concentrate on something. 
between alternatives. 
cast your mind back think back; recall an minor
earlier time. in a minor key especially of a literary workunderstated. 
close or shut your mind to or against
1995 Independent He was a moralist in a minor
refuse to consider or acknowledge. key. 
come or spring to mind of a thought oridea occur to someone; be thought of. mint
give someone a piece of your mind: see PIECE. in mint condition of an object new or as if
have a mind of your own Obe capable of new; in pristine condition. 
independent opinion or action, of an
inanimate object seem capable of thought : Theimagebehindthisphraseisofanewly minted coin. and desire, especially by behaving contrary
to the will of the person using it. have a or a good or half a mind to do minute
something be very much inclined to do one minute to midnight the last moment or
something. opportunity, informalmirror 190
1998 New Scientist It one minute to midnight
for the discredited WHO. mistaking
there is no mistaking someone ormirror something it is impossible not to recognize
al one with mirrors achieved with an someone or something. 
element of trickery. mite
This phrase alludes to the fact that a widow mite: see WIDOW. 
conjuring tricks are often explained as being ;
achieved through the skilful use of mirrors; mitt
compare with smoke and mirrors at SMOKE. get your mitts on obtain possession of. informal
mischief Mitt, an abbreviation of mitten, is an
do someone or yourself a mischief injure informal term for a person hand that dates 
someone or yourself, informal back to the late 19th century. 
make mischief create trouble or discord. 
misery mix
mix and match select and combine different
put someone out of their misery release
but complementary items, such as clothingsomeone from suspense or anxiety,
or pieces of equipment, to form a
especially by telling them something theycoordinated set. 
are anxious to know, informal
put something out of its misery end the mixed
suffering of a creature in pain by killing it. a mixed blessing something good which
nevertheless has some disadvantages. 
miss
give something a miss decide not to do or mixture
have something. British informal the mixture as before the same treatment
miss the cut: see make the cut at CUT. repeated. British
miss a beat hesitate or falter, especially in The mixture as before was an instruction !
demanding circumstances or when : which was formerly written on medicine
bottles. making a transition from one activity toanother. 
miss the boat or bus be too slow to take mobile
advantage of an opportunity, informa ownwardly or upwardly mobile moving
1987 Kathy Lette Girls Night Out He ll never get to a lower or higher social position; losing
divorced and marry her. She ll miss the boat. or gaining wealth and status. 
not miss much be alert to or aware of
everything that is happening around you. mockerinformal put the mockers on put an end to; thwart,
not miss a trick never fail to take advantage bring bad luck to. 
of a situation, informal This expression originated as early 20th 1965 Harper Bazaar Fenwicks... never century British slang. An Australian variant is misses a trick when it comes to picking up a put the mocks on. 
new accessory idea. 
01966 Lione avidson A Long Way to Shiloh
mistake Shimshon and the judo both seemed to have
put the mockers on this particular idyll. We
and no mistake without any doubt. left soon after. 1970 Joyce Porter Dover
informal Strikes Again This investigation had got the
1993 Sam McAughtry Touch & Go He was a mockers on it from the start. 
headcase and no mistake. 
make no mistake about it do not mockery
be deceived into thinking otherwise. make a mockery of something make
informal something seem foolish or absurd. 
1974 Times Make no mistake. We had a major 1998 New Scientist In somefisheries,waste
work of television last night. makes up about half of the landed catch,
191 month
which makes a mockery of most population on the money accurate; correct, chiefly North
models. Americanput money or put your money on place a
molehill bet on something. have confidence in
make a mountain out of a molehill: see the truth or success of something. MOUNTAIN. 
put your money where your mouth is take
action to support your statements or
moment opinions, informal
have your or its moments have short see the colour of someone money: see
periods that are better or more impressive COLOUR. 
than others. throw good money after bad incur further
moment of truth a crisis; a turning point loss in a hopeless attempt to recoup a
when a decision has to be made or a crisis previous loss. 
faced. throw money at something try to solve a
This expression is a translation of the problem by recklessly spending more
Spanish el momento de la verdad, which money on it, without due consideration of
refers to the final sword thrust in a bullfight, what is required. 
Monday monkeyas artful or clever as a wagonload orMonday morning quarterback a person who
is wise after the event. North American cartload of monkeys extremely clever or
mischievous. British informal
In American football, a quarterback is the
player stationed behind the centre who have a monkey on your back Qhave a
directs the team attacking play. In North burdensome problem, be dependent on
American English the word has also drugs, informal
developed the sense of a person who directs
Sense 2 originated as mid 20th-century US or coordinates an operation or project. A
slang; it can also mean experience withdrawal Monday morning quarterback is someone
symptoms after ceasing to take a drug. 
who passes judgement on something or
criticizes it when it is too late for their
comments to be of any use, since the
have or get your monkey up be angry. 
particular game or project in question has like a monkey on a stick restless and agitated. 
finished or been completed. The image here is of a child toy which
consists of a figure of a monkey attached to a stick up and down which it can be moved. 
money
be in the money have or win a lot of money. make a monkey of or out of someone
informal humiliate someone by making themappear ridiculous. 
for my money in my opinion ornot give a monkey be completely
judgement. for my preference or taste. indifferent or unconcerned, informal
have money to burn have so much money put a person monkey up make someone
that you can spend as lavishly as you want. angry. 
money burns a hole in your pocket or
purse you have an irresistible urge to monster
spend money as soon as you have it. Frankenstein monster: see FRANKENSTEIN. 
money for jam or old rope money the green-eyed monster: see GREEN-EYED. 
earned for little or no effort. an easy task. 
British informal month
These expressions, which date back to the a month of Sundays a very long, seemingly
early 20th century, may have originated as endless period of time. 
military slang. In 1919, the Athenaeum stated that money for jam arose as the result of the This expression may be a reference to the great use of jam in the Army. traditionally slow passage of Sundays as a
money talks wealth gives power and result of religious restrictions on activity or
influence to those who possess it. proverb entertainment. In a letter written in 1849,
monty 192G. Jewsbury talked of the absence of mail
deliveries on Sundays, remarking: If don tmoonlight
get a better letter from you... you may pass do a moonlight flit make a hurried, usually
" a month of Sundays" at breakfast without nocturnal, removal or change of abode,
any letter from me. especially in order to avoid paying your
rent, informal
1998 Country Life All in all, the Ministry of
Agriculture is gaining the no-nonsense, get- Make a moonlight flitting is recorded
your-coats-off atmosphere that Jack from the early 19th century and appears to
Cunningham could not have managed in a have originated in northern England or
month of Sundays. Scotland. The expression is now often
shortened to do a moonlight. montythe full monty the full amount expected, morning
desired, or possible, informal morning, noon, and night all of the time;
constantly. 
The origin of this expression is unclear. 
1993 Tony Parker May the Lord in His Mercy beAmong various, though unsubstantiated
Kind to Belfast It was the sort of relationship 
theories, one cites as the source the phrase
the full Montague Burton, apparently
where nothing else matters for you except to
meaning a complete three-piece suit from be with that other person morning, noon and
the name of a tailor of made-to-measure night. 
clothing in the early 20th century. Another
theory recounts the possibility of a military mortal
origin, with the full monty being the full
shuffle off this mortal coil: see COIL. 
cooked English breakfast insisted upon byField Marshal Montgomery. Morton
Morton fork a situation in which there aremoon two choices or alternatives whose
bark at the moon clamour or make an outcry consequences are equally unpleasant. 
to no effect. ohn Morton c. 1420-1500 was
The barking of dogs at a full moon has Archbishop of Canterbury and chief minister !
been a metaphor for futile activity since the of Henry VII. Morton fork was the argument ;
mid 17th century. used by him to extract contributions to the
royal treasury: the obviously rich must have
cry or ask for the moon ask for what is money and the frugal must have savings, so
unattainable or impossible. British neither could evade his demands. 

The moon in this expression, which dates ;
j!from the mid 16th century, stands forsomething distant and unattainable, as itmote
does in promise someone the moon below. a mote in someone eye a trivial fault in
someone which is less serious than one in
many moons ago a long time ago. informal someone else who is being critical. 

The reference here is to the phases of the A mote is a tiny speck of dust or a similar ;
moon marking out the months. substance. The phrase comes from Matthew ;
7:3-5: Why beholdest thou the mote that is once in a blue moon: see BLUE. in thy brother eye, but considerest not the
beam that is in thine own eye? : the
over the moon extremely happy; delighted. implication is that someone is ignoring a
informal glaring fault of their own while criticizing asmaller one in someone else. 
This phrase comes from an old nursery
rhyme which includes the lines Heigh diddle 
diddle, the cat and the fiddle, the cow moth
jumped over the moon. 
like a moth to the flame irresistibly attracted
promise someone the moon or earth to someone or something. 
promise something that is unattainable. British mothball
1998 New Scientist Scientists tend to promise in mothballs unused but kept in good
taxpayers the moon, and then not deliver. condition for future use. 
193 move
motion move mountains achieve spectacular and
go through the motions Qdo something apparently impossible results, make
perfunctorily, without any enthusiasm or every possible effort. 
commitment. simulate an action; act out In sense 1, the phrase alludes to 1
something. Corinthians 13:2: And though have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries,
motley and all knowledge; and though have all
faith, so that could remove mountains, and wear motley play the fool. have not charity, am nothing. 
O Motley was the name given to the
j particoloured clothes worn by a court jester
in former times. mousetrap
a better mousetrap an improved version ofa well-known article. mould
break the mould put an end to a pattern This expression comes from an
of events or behaviour, especially one observation attributed to Ralph Waldo
Emerson in 1889, though also claimed by
that has become rigid and restrictive, Elbert Hubbard: If a man write a better
by doing things in a markedly different book, preach a better sermon, or make a
way. better mousetrap than his neighbour, tho he ;
build his house in the woods, the world
Originally this phrase referred to casting
will make a beaten path to his door. 
artefacts in moulds: destroying a mould
ensured that no further identical examplesi could be produced. The expression became a
catchphrase in Britain in the early 1980s with mouth
the foundation of the Socia emocratic be all mouth and no trousers tend to talk
Party. Its founders promoted the party as boastfully without any intention of acting
breaking the out-of-date mould of British on your words, informal
politics, a phrase used by Roy Jenkins in a 1998 Oldie What was the point of the
speech in 1980. Sitwells?... The image was the point,
transcending mere achievement... The
Sitwells were all mouth and no trousers. mountain
have a mountain to climb be facing a very
make someone mouth water cause
someone to salivate at the prospect ofdifficult task. appetizing food. cause someone to feel
if the mountain won come to Muhammad, an intense desire to possess something. 
Muhammad must go to the mountain if put words in or into someone mouth
one party will not compromise, the other falsely report what someone has said. 
party will have to make the extra effort. prompt or encourage someone to say
The story behind this expression is that something. 
Muhammad was once challenged to
demonstrate his credentials as a prophet by
take the words out of someone mouth say
summoning Mount Safa to come to him. what someone else was about to say. 
When the mountain did not move in responseto the summons, Muhammad observed mouthful
that had the mountain moved it would give someone a mouthful talk to or shout
undoubtedly have overwhelmed him and
all his followers and that therefore he wouldat someone in an angry, abusive, or
go to the mountain to give thanks to God for severely critical way; swear at someone. 
his mercy in not allowing this disaster to British informal
happen. say a mouthful make a striking or important
statement; say something noteworthy. 
make a mountain out of a molehill foolishly North American informal
or pointlessly exaggerate the importance
of something trivial. movableO The contrast between the size of a movable feast: see FEAST. 
molehills and that of mountains has been
made in this and related expressions since themove
late 16th century. move up a gear: see change gear at GEAR. mover 194
get a move on hurry up. informa rag someone through the mud: see drag
1992 Lisa Tuttle Lost Futures So stop worrying, someone through the dirt at DRAG. 
sweetheart, and let get a move on... don fling or sling or throw mud make
want to be late. disparaging or scandalous remarks or
make a move take action. Qstart on a accusations, informaljourney; leave somewhere. British
The proverb throw dirt or mud enough, 
make a move on or put the moves on make and some will stick, to which this phrase
a proposition to someone, especially of a alludes, is attributed to the Florentine
statesman Niccolô Machiavelli 1469-1527. sexual nature, informal
move the goalposts: see GOALPOST. someone name is mud someone is in
move heaven and earth: see HEAVEN. disgrace or unpopular, informal 
move mountains: see MOUNTAIN. Mud was a colloquial term for a fool from move with the times keep abreast of current theearlyl 8th century to the late 19th century. 
thinking or developments. 1998 Times Just because smoked a few lousy
the spirit moves someone: see SPIRIT. cigarettes every hour for 25 years, my name is
mud in the insurance business. 
movera mover and shaker someone at the centre of muddy
events who makes things happen; a muddy the waters make an issue or a
powerful person. situation more confusing and harder to
Movers and shakers is first recorded in understand by introducing complications. 
Arthur Shaughnessy 1874 poem Ode. The figurative use of muddy to mean
1998 Times Ten years from now his name will make something hard to perceive or
again be high on the list of movers and shakers understand occurs in Shakespeare; muddy
to watch in the decade. the waters dates from the mid 19th century. 
muchnot much in it little difference betweenmug
things being compared. a mug game an activity which it is stupid
to engage in because it is likely to be
so much the better or worse it is better or unsuccessful or dangerous, informal
worse for that reason. 
1995 Guardian If you can get a tropical fruit Mu9 a 19th-century slang for a
fool, in particular someone who has beenuice... so much the better. 
duped by a card sharper or criminal. Mug  
game appeared in the early 20th century
muchness and has been applied to a wide variety of
much of a muchness very similar; nearly the activities, especially horse racing and betting
same, informal on horses. 
Muchness, used in Middle English in the 1992 Economist From the way many western
sense large size, bigness , is now very seldom businessmen talk, you would think
used outside this expression, which dates investing in eastern Germany was a mug  
from the early 18th century. game. mullock
muck poke mullock at ridicule someone. Australian &
as common as muck of low social status. New Zealand informal
British informal
make a muck of handle incompetently; Middle English, mullock meant refuse or rubbish , a sense which only survives in
bungle. British informa ialect use. In Australian English it came to be !
where there muck there brass dirty or used of rock that either did not contain gold :
unpleasant activities are also lucrative. or from which the gold had been extracted,
proverb and it then developed the extended sense of
worthless information or nonsense. This
mud phrase dates from the early 20th century;
compare with poke borak at at BORAK. 
clear a : see A R. 195 mutton
Bulletin explained Murphy Law as If an
multitude aircraft part can be installed incorrectly,
cover a multitude of sins conceal or gloss someone will install it that way. 
over a lot of problems or defects. 
This phrase refers to 1 Peter 4:8: For muscle
charity shall cover the multitude of sins. 
flex your muscles: see FLEX. mum mushroom
keep mum remain silent about something; like mushrooms suddenly and in great
not reveal a secret, informal numbers. 
mum the word say nothing; don reveal a
secret, informal music
In both of these idioms, mum stands for
music to your ears something that is
an inarticulate sound made with pursed lips very pleasant or gratifying to hear or
indicating either unwillingness or inability to discover. 
speak. 
1991 Atlantic City Mum the word on who will mustard
play the major figures in this tale of woe. cut the mustard: see CUT. 
a grain of mustard seed: see GRAIN. 
murderget away with murder succeed in doing muster
whatever you choose without being pass muster be accepted as adequate or
punished or suffering any disadvantage. satisfactory. 
informalmurder will out murder cannot remain This was originally a military expression,
meaning come through a review orundetected. 
inspection without censure. It is found
This expression was used by Chaucer in earlier late 16th century to late 17th century
The Prioress Tale: Mordre wol out, certeyn, in the now obsolete form pass the musters
it wol nat faille. and has been in figurative use since the late
16th century. scream or yell blue murder make an
extravagant and noisy protest, informal mutton 
A North American variant of this phrase is dead as mutton: see dead as a doornail at
scream bloody murder. DEAD. 
1995 lain Banks Whit was now left with the mutton dressed as lamb a middle-aged
ticklish problem of how to let my great-aunt or old woman dressed in a style
know there was somebody there in the room suitable for a much younger woman. 
with her without... causing her to scream British informal
blue murder. 
Mutton occurs in various derogatory
Murphy contexts relating to women. It has been used
as a slang term for prostitutes from the early
Murphy law if anything can go wrong it 16th century, for example, while the phrase
will. hawk your mutton means flaunt your sexualattractiveness or of a prostitute solicit for
Murphy law is said to have been the
clients. inspiration of a Californian project manager for the firm Northrop, referring to a remark 1988 Salman Rushdie The Satanic Verses
made in 1949 by a colleague, Captain Mutton dressed as lamb,fiftyplus and
Edward Murphy of the Wright Field-Aircraft batting her eyelashes like an eighteen Laboratory. In 1955, Aviation Mechanics year-old. Nn
nail people in such a way as to imply that theyare close
hard as nails: see HARD. acquaintances. 
hit the nail on the head: see HIT. your nametoinvent discover, or found
something which then becomes known by
nail your colours to the mast: see COLOURS. ur a e
a nail in the coffin an action or event a a a sion. 
regarded as likely to have a detrimental or.... _
& - <. have your name in hqhts of an actor or
destructive effect on a situation, enter- .. " , -, A 
performer have their name displayed in
lights outside a theatre, concert hall, etc. 
1981 R. Lancaster Plant Hunting in Nepal A major , f
U De a  
nail in the coffin of the plant hunter, so some  people believe, is the growing importance in all but name existing in a particular state
placed on plant conservation in the wild. but not formally recognized as such. 
nail a lie expose something as a falsehood or 1999 Chris Hulme Manslaughter United He had
deception spent twenty-one out of twenty-five years in
segregation solitary confinement in all but
The reference here is to shopkeepers name. 
nailing forged coins to their shop counter to n a by description but not n
expose them and put them out of circulation, : reality
or to farmers pinning dead vermin to a barn i. „. .. ., ... „ ,
door as a deterrent to others. I993 Har?er Ma zm In Western Europe the
Communist parties shrank year after
on the nail of payment without delay. year. they had become small-bourgeois
_ _.... capitalist parties, Communist in name only. 
The origins of this expression are make a name for yourself become famous. 
uncertain. It may be related to the obsolete „ .u ~« ;A S, A K
,. j. -i . -x name and shame identify wrongdoers by
phrase to the nail, meaning to perfection or : .... a e
to the utmost , which derived from the habit th intention of embarrassing
of sculptors giving a finishing touch to their them into improving their behaviour,
work with a fingernail, or to joiners testing 1998 New Scientist all for naming and
the accuracy of a joint in the same way. shaming, as this is worth many times more
A North American equivalent is on the than fines. 
barrelhead. name names mention specific names,
l993 jonathanGash paid dL sïlkgal especially of people involved in something
syndicates pay cash on the nail. wrong "legal. 
n a no
right on the nail with complete accuracy. names refrain from mentioning the
names of people involved in an incident. 
nalrAif 1999 New York Times Naming no names, two
fia Ken familiar Presidential candidates... recently
the naked truth the plain truth, without sought to get at the son by condemning the
concealment or embellishment. Ofather  
Pack promise of a kinder
drill is a iorm andpunishmentof military gentler : : nation. 
in which an offender has to perform parade- il œ S phrase i ground
- " - ? < the gaexercises me carrying
while themain purposea heavy pack. or!m
nudaque Veritas, found in Horace Odes, or early
This important aspectexpression
20th-century of a situation. is often
to any of various fables that personify Truth informal
as a naked woman in contrast to the names, no pack drill punishment or
ela a es a a f Fal 0 d
197 navel
used as an aside to recommend reticenceabout a particular subject. nasty
a nasty taste in the mouth: see a bad taste in
put a name to know or manage to remember the mouth at TASTE. 
what someone or something is called. a nasty piece or bit of work an unpleasant
someone name is mud: see MUD. or untrustworthy person, informal
something has your name on it you are something nasty in the woodshed: see
destined or particularly suited to receive or WOODSHED. 
experience a specified thing. nation
take someone name in vain: see VAIN. 
one nation a nation not divided by social
to name but a few giving only these as inequality. 
examples, even though more could be
cited. One nation was a political slogan of the
1996 Mail on Sunday A choice of sundried 1990s, associated especially with the debate
tomato bread, honey and walnut knots, dill between the right and left wings of the
British Conservative Party. 
and sesame knots, peppercorn rolls and
croissants to name but a few. what in a name? names are arbitrary labels. native
go native of a person living away from their
This phrase comes from Shakespeare  
own country or region abandon their own
Romeo and Juliet. What in a name? that
which we call a rose By any other name would culture, customs, or way of life and adopt
smell as sweet. those of the country or region they are
living in. you name it whatever you can think of used
to express the extent or variety of some- nature
thing, informal call of nature used euphemistically to refer
1991 Angela Carter Wise Children The streets of to a need to urinate or defecate. 
tall, narrow houses were stuffed to the brim get or go back to nature return to the
with stand-up comics; adagio dancers;
type of life regarded as being more in tune
soubrettes; conjurers;fiddlers;speciality acts
with nature that existed before the develop with dogs, doves, goats, you name it. 
ment of complex industrial societies. in the nature of things inevitable or
inevitably. nana 2002 Economist The IMF sometimes makes
do or lose your nana lose your temper. mistakes. It is in the nature of things: the Fund
Australian practises battlefield medicine. 
off your nana mentally deranged. Australian in a state of nature in an uncivilized
Nana in these idioms is probably short or uncultivated state, totally naked. 
for banana; compare with go bananas in Christian theology in a morally
at BANANA. unregenerate condition, unredeemed bydivine grace. 
nature red in tooth and claw: see RED. nap
go nap win all the matches or games in a the nature of the beast the inherent or
series, risk everything in one attempt. essential quality or character of something,
not go nap on not be too keen on; not care which cannot be changed and must be
much for. Australian informal accepted, informal
your better nature the good side of your
Nap is the name of a card game character; your capacity for tolerance,
resembling whist in which a player attempts generosity, or sympathy. 
to take all five tricks. Its original name was 1995 Daily Mail Pollard is thrown out of the
Napoleon. Woolpack and tries to weasel his way back in
by appealing to Caroline better nature. nappingcatch someone napping of an action or navel
event find someone off guard and contemplate your navel spend time
unprepared to respond, informal complacently considering yourself or your
near 198
own interests; concentrate on one issue at up to your neck in heavily involved in
the expense of a wider view. something onerous or unpleasant, very
busy with, informal
near win by a neck succeed by a small margin. so near and yet so far a rueful comment on a
situation in which you have narrowly Ned Kelly
failed to achieve an aim. game as Ned Kelly: see GAME. nearest needle
your nearest and dearest your close friends a needle in a haystack something that is
and relatives. almost impossible to find because it
is concealed by so many other similar
necessary things. 
a necessary evil something that is 2002 New York Times Magazine Terrorists don t
fit a consistent profile: you re looking for a
undesirable but must be accepted. 
needle in a haystack, but the color and shape
1997 Internet World Advertising may be a of the needle keep changing. 
necessary evil. After all, someone has to
support Internet ventures. sharp as a needle: see SHARP. 
neck needs
break your neck to do something exert must needs do something cannot avoid or
yourself to the utmost to achieve help doing something. foolishly insist on
something, informa oing something. 
get or catch it in the neck be severely needs must sometimes you are forced to take
criticized or punished, informal a course of action that you would have
have the brass neck to do something have preferred to avoid. 
the impudence or nerve to do something. : This is a shortened form of the proverb
informal needs must when the Devi rives, which is
first found in a work by the medieval author neck and neck level in a race, competition, or
ohn Lydgate. comparison. This phrase, together with win by a neck 
below, originally developed with referencenelly
to horse racing. A neck is the length of the not on your nelly certainly not. 
head and neck of a horse as a measure of its This expression, modelled on the phraselead in a race. not on your life, originated as not on your
1998 Spectator The Republicans had a 30-point Nelly Duff, which is British rhyming slang for lead over the Democrats; today, the puff , meaning breath of life. 
Democrats are neck and neck on what ssupposed to be a bedrock conservative issue. 
neck or nothing risking everything on
nerve
success. a bag of nerves: see BAG. 
1934 Leslie Charteris The Saint Intervenes In get on someone nerves irritate or annoy
broad daylight, there was no chance of further someone, informal
concealment; and it was neck or nothing at have nerves of steel not be easily upset or
that point. frightened. 
the same neck of the woods the same small
geographical area or community. live on your nerves or your nerve ends be
extremely anxious or tense. Aecc in the sense of narrow strip of
woodland is recorded from the late 18th strain every nerve make every possible
century. effort. Nerve is used here in an earlier sense of
1998 Spectator Both letters comefromthe ! tendon or sinew. 
same neck of the woods, both are on the same
subject and both are cries for help which are touch or hit a raw nerve provoke a
being ignored. reaction by referring to a sensitive topic. 
stick your neck out: see STICK. a war of nerves: see WAR. 
199 niceNessus a new one on me, him, etc. an account,idea, or joke not previously encountered by
the shirt of Nessus used to refer to ame, him, etc. informal
destructive force or influence, literaryturn over a new leaf: see LEAF. 
In Greek mythology, Nessus was a centaur
killed by Hercules. While dying, Nessus tolda whole new ball game: see BALL. 
Deianira, Hercules wife, that if she ever had
cause to doubt her husband love, she should news
wrap him in a shirt soaked in Nessus blood as be bad news be a problem or handicap. 
this would ensure his constancy. Deianira
followed these instructions, but the centaur sinformal
blood was in fact a powerful poison that 1996 City Paper Baltimore From the moment
corroded Hercules body and as he tried to we see Mark Wahlberg... surrounded by
remove the shirt chunks of his flesh were pool-hall scumbags, we know he bad news. 
ripped away. be good news be an asset; be commendableor admirable, informal
1922 Edith Wharton The Glimpses of the Moon It
was as if a sickness long smouldering in him no news is good news without information
had broken out and become acute, enveloping to the contrary you can assume that all is
him in the Nessus shirt of his memories. well, proverb
nest New Yorka mare nest: see MARE. a New York minute a very short time; a
moment. US informalnesterempty nester: see EMPTY. next
net next in line immediately below the present
holder of a position in order of succession. 
slip or fall through the net escape from orbe missed by something organized to catch
or deal with you. next door
1977 Margaret Drabble The Ice Age Britain is, the boy or girl next door a person or the
after all, a welfare state, and not many slip type of a person perceived as familiar,
through its net. approachable, and dependable,
surf the net: see SURF. typically in the context of a romantic
partnership. nettlegrasp the nettle: see GRASP. nibs
his nibs a mock title used to refer to a self network important man, especially one who is in
the old boy network: see OLD. authority, informal
1989 Guy Vanderhaege Homesick Whatever his
never nibs prefers. see that hasn changed either. 
He still expects things to be organized to suit
never-never land an imaginary Utopian
him and only him. 
place or situation. This expression is often used with allusionnice
to the imaginary country in J. M. Barrie make nice or nice-nice be pleasant or polite
Peter Pan 1904. The term was used earlierto to someone, typically in a hypocritical way. denote the remote and unpopulated
North American informalnorthern part of the Northern Territory and
Queensland in Australia from which, it is nice one used to express approval. British
implied, a person might never return. informal
2001 Searcher Waving it aloft with delight,
never say die: see DIE. shouted a Howzat! that merely elicited
grudging grunts of Nice one from the
new Mexborough duo. 
a new broom: see BROOM. 
nice work if you can get it used to express
a new kid on the block: see BLOCK. envy of what is perceived to be another
new off the irons: see IRON. person more favourable situation,
nicety 200
especially if they seem to have reached it night of the long knives a treacherous
with little effort, informal betrayal or ruthless action. 
Nice work if you can get it was the title of Night of the long knives is especially
an Ira Gershwin song from 1937. associated with the massacre of the
Brownshirts on Hitler orders in 1934. 
Traditionally, the phrase referred to the
nicety legendary massacre of the Britons by Hengist
to a nicety precisely. in 472, described by Geoffrey of Monmouth
in his Historia Regum Britanniae. In Britain
it has been particularly used of the occasion
nick in 1962 on which Harold Macmillan dismissed
a third of his cabinet at the same time, of
in — nick in a specified condition. British
which the Liberal politician Jeremy Thorpe
informalremarked Greater love hath no man than
1997 Ian Rankin Black b Blue Don be this, that he lay down his friends for his
fooled by the wheezing old pensioner life. routine. Eve around fifty, still in good
nick. in the nick of time only just in time; just at nine
the critical moment. dressed up to the nines dressed verysmartly or elaborately. 
Nick is used here in the sense of the
precise moment of an occurrence or an This expression may come from the 99th
event. This form of the phrase dates from the Wiltshire Regiment, a military unit who were mid 17th century, but in the very nick is noted for their smart appearance. 
recorded from the late 16th century. a nine days wonder: see WONDER. 
1985 Nini Herman My Kkinian Home Time and
again, when all seemed lost, somehow won nine to five typical office hours. 
through in the nick of time. nine times out of ten on nearly every
nick someone for cheat someone out of occasion. 
something, typically a sum of money. North on cloud nine: see CLOUD. American informal
1962 Washington Daily News Taxpayers... 
have heard rumblings that they might ninepence
be nicked for about a million dollars no more than ninepence in the shilling of
each year to subsidize professional sports low intelligence, datedhere. 
Since the decimalization of the British
coinage, this phrase has gradually fallen out nickel of use, but there are numerous otherhumorous variations on the theme of !
accept a wooden nickel be fooled or
someone not possessing their proper share
swindled. US of brains or intelligence, for example
A wooden nickel is a worthless or a sandwich short of a picnic see SANDWICH. 
counterfeit coin. 
not worth a plugged nickel of no value. ninepin
US go down or drop or fall like ninepins
topple or succumb in large numbers. 
A plugged coin has had a part removed 1994 Beryl Gilroy Sunlight on Sweet Water They
and the space filled with base material. were falling like ninepins to the wizardry of
our fast bowler, Bachan. 
1991 R. Hawkey & R. Bingham Wild Card If
as much as a whisper gets out... none of
our lives are going to be worth a plugged nineteen
nickel. talk nineteen to the dozen: see TALK. night nip
make a night of it: see make a day of it at in the nip naked. Irish informal
MAKE. nip something in the bud suppress or
night and day all the time; constantly. destroy something at an early stage. 201 noise
This phrase refers to the horticultural noblesse
practice of pinching out plant buds to
prevent the development of shoots or
noblesse oblige privilege entailsflowers. Nip in this sense was used responsibility. 
figuratively in the late 16th century, and nip in the bud in the early 17th century. nobody
be nobody fool: see F L. 
put in the nips cadge, borrow, or extort
like nobody business: see B S S. 
money. Australian & New Zealand informalnit nodget or give someone or something
keep nit keep watch or act as a guard. Australian
the nod be selected or approved or
select or approve someone or something,
Nit here is possibly an alteration of nix, a get or give someone a signal or
warning signal by schoolchildren that a information. teacher is approaching. 
a nod as good as a wink there no need for
pick nits look for and criticize small or further elaboration or explanation. 
insignificant faults or errors. This is a shortened form of the proverb,
dating from the late 18th century, a nod is as The image here is of the painstaking
good as a wink to a blind horse, used to
removal of tiny parasitic nits lice or lice eggs convey that a mere hint or suggestion can be jfrom someone hair. The phrase originated
or has been understood. A nod and a wink is in the mid 20th century, chiefly in North
also used to mean a hint or innuendo. American usage. 
on the nod by general agreement and
without discussion. British informalno
no man land an intermediate or ambiguous nodding
area of thought or activity. 
be on nodding terms know someone
This phrase was used literally in the lateslightly. 
16th century for a piece of land without an
owner, but it is particularly associated with have a nodding acquaintance with
the terrain between the German trenches or something know
and those of the Allied forces in World War I. someone slightly; know a little about
The figurative use of the phrase dates from something. 
the late 19th century. 1989 Donnie Radcliffe Simply Barbara Bush
Their families had lived less than ten miles
the noes have it the negative votes are in apart as they were growing up, and their
the majority. Compare with the ayes have fathers almost certainly had a nodding
it at AYE. acquaintance on the golf course. 
no two ways about it used to convey
that there can be no doubt about no-go
something. a no-go area an area which is dangerous or
not or never take no for an answer persist impossible to enter or to which entry is
restricted or forbidden. in spite of refusals. 
no worries all right; fine, informal As a noun, no-go was first used in the late — or no — regardless of the person, thing, or 19th century in the sense of an impracticable quality specified. situation. Its use in this phrase, with the
1995 Kazuo Ishiguro The Unconsoled was sense of no entry , is particularly associated
with Northern Ireland in the 1970s. thinking there no reason we can start doing
all sorts of things together now, house or no 1971 Guardian For journalists and others, the
house. Bogside and Creggan estates are no-go areas ,
with the IRA in total effective control. noble
the noble art boxing, chiefly archaic
noise
a big noise: see a big cheese at BIG. 
A fuller version of this phrase is the noble make a noise speak or act in a way designed
art or science of self-defence. to attract a lot of attention or publicity. none 202
get up someone nose irritate or annoynone someone, informal
be none the wiser: see R. 
none the worse: see WORSE. give someone a bloody nose inflict aresounding defeat on someone. 
will have or want none of something
refuse to accept something especially with keep your nose clean stay out of trouble. 
informalreference to behaviour. 
2000 Joe Pemberton Forever & Ever Amen It keep your nose out of refrain from
wasn James idea to board the Christina. He interfering in someone else affairs. 
told Aunty Mary that it had sunk on the telly
but she would have none of it. keep your nose to the grindstone: seeGRINDSTONE. 
non-linear lead someone by the nose: see LEAD. 
go non-linear become very excited or angry, on the nose Qto a person sense of smell. 
especially about a particular obsession. yinformal, chiefly North American
informa istasteful; offensive. Australian informal
This expression may have originated as a put someone nose out of joint upset or
humorous play on the phrase go off the rails annoy someone, informalsee RAIL. 
turn up your nose at show distaste or
contempt for something, informal
nonsense under someone nose of an action
make nonsense or a nonsense of reduce committed openly and boldly, but without
the value of something to a ridiculous someone noticing or noticing in time to
degree. prevent it. informalnook with your nose in the air haughtily. 
1994 Time Charles de Gaulle arrived in the U. S. 
every nook and cranny every part or aspect with his nose in the air; he considered Jackie
of something. empty and much too beau monde. noose not
put your head in a noose bring about your not half: see HALF. 
own downfall. 
not in my back yard expressing an objection
north to the siting of something regarded as
up north to or in the north of a country. undesirable in your own neighbourhood,informal
with the implication that it would be
acceptable elsewhere. nose This expression originated in the USA in
by a nose of a victory by a very narrow derogatory references to anti-nuclear
margin. ; campaigners. In Britain it is particularly
associated with reports of the then
I" horse racing, by a nose is the narrowest Environment Secretary Nicholas Ridley  
margin by which a horse can win. opposition in 1988 to housing developments near his own home. More recently, it has
cannot see further than your nose be been used in association with the siting of
unwilling or fail to consider different housing for refugees and asylum seekers,
possibilities or to foresee the consequences The phrase has given rise to the acronym
of your actions. nimby as a term for someone with these
attitudes. 
count noses count people, typically in order
to determine the numbers in a vote. not least: see LEAST. 
cut off your nose to spite your facedisadvantage yourself in the course of note
trying to disadvantage another. hit or strike the right or wrong note say
This idea was proverbial for self- or do something in exactly the right or
defeating malice in both medieval Latin and wrong way. 
medieval French, and has been found in strike or sound a — note express a feeling
English since the mid 16th century. 
or view of a particular kind. 203 nudge
2000 Times John McCain... was expected to you ain seen nothing yet there is
strike a hawkish note last night, calling for the something even more extreme or
upgrading of the Armed Forces. impressive in store, informal
This expression was popularized by AInothing olson aside in the 1927 film The Jazz Singer, be as nothing compared to be insignificant you ain heard nuttin yet. 
in comparison with. 
1998 Oldie Believe me, being pronounced
anathema is as nothing compared to the earful notice
you get from a liberal who considers himself at short or a moment notice with little
insufficiently appreciated. warning or time for preparation. 
have nothing on someone or something put someone on notice or serve notice
have much less of a particular quality or warn someone of something about or likely
ability than someone or something; be to occur, often in a formal or threatening
inferior to someone or something in a way. 
particular respect, especially of the
police have no incriminating information now
about someone, informal now or never used to convey urgency. 
nothing daunted without having been made 1994 James Kelman How Late It Was, How Late
fearful or apprehensive. It now or never, know what saying; he  
out this once, there no gony be a second
This use of nothing to mean not at all is time. 
now archaic and is almost always found
either in this phrase or in nothing loath now you re talking an expression of
below. enthusiastic agreement or approval. 
1992 Robert Black Orkney: A Place of Safety?
Nothing daunted, the committee members nowhere
set to. in the middle of nowhere: see MIDDLE. 
nothing doing there is no prospect of a road to nowhere: see ROAD. 
success or agreement. nothing is
happening, informal nth
there nothing or nothing else for it to the nth degree to any extent; to the
there no alternative. British utmost. 
2002 Which? If there nothing for it other
than to get a shiny new appliance, the next In mathematics, nth denotes an
question to ask is: Where does the old one go? unspecified member of a series of numbers or !
enumerated items. nothing less than used to express how
extreme something is. 1994 i-D Along the way they argue, get
1990 Katherine Frank Emily Brontë Nothing harassed by ignorant locals, sing along to their
less than the ultimate feminine destiny favourite tunes and camp it up to the nth
of marriage had been within her reach, degree. 
and Charlotte had almost immediatelyspurned it. nudge
nothing loath quite willing. a nudge and a wink encouragement given
This expression was used by John Milton
secretly or implicitly; covert support. 
in Paradise Lost Her hand he seis d, and to a B a nudge and a wink are covert signs shadie bank... He led her nothing loath. of complicity, with wink also having the
implication of shutting your eyes to
nothing much in it: see MUCH. something. 
nothing to it very simple to do. informal
1998 Times There was a nudge and a wink at
stop at nothing: see STOP. some mercenary help that in the end proved
sweet nothings words of affection unnecessary. 
exchanged by lovers. nudge nudge wink wink used to draw
think nothing of it do not apologize or feel attention to an innuendo, especially a
bound to show gratitude used as a polite sexual one, in the previous statement. 
response. informal
nuff 204
This expression is a catchphrase from length of your life, for example in Job 38:21:
Monty Python Flying Circus, a British Knowest thou it, because thou wast then
television comedy programme. born? or because the number of thy days is
great? nuff take care of or look after number one be
nuff said there is no need to say any more. selfishly absorbed in protecting your own
Nuff is an informal or dialect shorteningperson and interests, informal
of enough. without number too many to count. 1990 Bill Bryson Mother Tongue The varieties of
wordplay available in English are almostnuisance without number—puns, tongue-twisters,
make a nuisance of yourself cause trouble anagrams,riddles,cryptograms. 
and annoyance, usually deliberately oravoidably. numbered
someone or something days are
number numbered someone or something will not
a back number: see BACK. survive or remain in a particular position
by numbers following simple instructions for much longer. 
identified by numbers; mechanically. nut
This phrase alludes to painting by be nuts about or on be very enthusiastic
numbers, a painting kit with a canvas on about or fond of. informal
which numbers have been marked to indicate 1934 Dashiell Hammett The Thin Man
which colour of paint should be applied at
She told me she had this job with Wynantwhich place. 
and he was nuts about her and she was
1992 Canadian YachtingWe discovered sitting pretty. 
navigation by numbers as our beamy flotilla do your nut be extremely angry or agitated. 
floated from buoy to buoy reading off the British informal
charts like a road map. 
do a number on treat someone badly, In this phrase and in off your nut below, ! nut means head. 
typically by deceiving, humiliating, or
criticizing them in a calculated and for nuts even tolerably well. British informal
thorough way. North American informal 1934 Angela Thirkell Wild Strawberries That
have someone number understand a Miss Stevenson can play for nuts. 
person real motives or character and nuts and bolts the basic practica etails of
thereby gain some advantage, informal
something, informalhave someone name and number
off your nut out of your mind; crazy, informalon it of a bomb, bullet, or other
missile be destined to hit a specified take or use a sledgehammer to crack a nut:
See SLEDGEHAMMER. person, informal
make your number report your arrival, pay a a tough or hard nut to crack someone
courtesy call, or report for duty. who is difficult to deal with or hard to beat;
a formidable person, informal
This expression has nautical origins: when ships made their number, they signalled to
others the number by which they werenutmeg
registered. The literal sense was first recorded a wooden nutmeg a false or fraudulent
in the mid 19th-century, with the figurative thing. US
extension developing soon afterwards. 
A wooden nutmeg was a piece of wood
public enemy number one: see PUBLIC. shaped to resemble a nutmeg and
fraudulently sold as the real thing. This
someone number is up the time has come deception was particularly associated with
when someone is doomed to die or suffer the inhabitants of Connecticut, giving rise to some other disaster or setback, informal the nickname the Nutmeg State. 

O This phrase may allude to a lottery
j number or to the various biblical passages nutshell
j referring to the number of your days , i. the ;
in a nutshell in the fewest possible words. 
205 nutty
A nutshell is a traditional metaphor for a nutty as a fruitcake completely crazy, informal
very small space. It is used by Shakespeare in Hamlet: could be bounded in a nutshell, Nutty meaning mad or crazy dates from !
and count myself a king of infinite space, the late 19th century, and this phrase,
were it not that have bad dreams. punning on the sense of full of nuts , from
the 1930s. Fruitcake is also used on its own to mean a crazy or eccentric person. nutty
be nutty about like very much, informalOo
ing something no more assumptions
oar should be made than are necessary. rest on your oars cease rowing by leaning
on the handles of your oars, thereby lifting This principle takes its name from to the
them horizontally out of the water. relax English philosopher and Franciscan friar
William of Occam c. 1285-1349: the image is iyour efforts. 
that of the razor cutting away all extraneous A US variant of this phrase is lay on your assumptions. 
oars. stick or poke or put your oar in give an odd
opinion or advice without being asked. odd one or man out someone or
informal something that is different to the others. 
1992 Daily Telegraph My only minor fault is someone who is not able to fit easily or
sometimes like putting my oar in... and my comfortably into a group or society. 
advice can be a little brutal. odds
oat ask no odds ask no favours. US
feel your oats feel lively and buoyant. US by all odds certainly. North American
informal it makes no odds it does not matter, informal,
chiefly British
Oats are used as feed for horses, making !
them friskier and more energetic. This phrase and what the odds below
come from an earlier use of odds to mean
get your oats have sexual intercourse. ! difference in advantage or effect. 
informal
1965 William Dick A Bunch of Ratbags was lay or give odds offer a bet with odds
kissing her excitedly and passionately favourable to the other person betting,
... Cookie, you re gonna get your oats tonight be very sure about something. 
for sure, thought to myself. 
The opposite of lay odds in sense 1 is take off your oats lacking an appetite, informal odds which means offer a bet with odds
sow your wild oats go through a period of unfavourable to the other person betting. 
wild or promiscuous behaviour while
young. over the odds above what is generally
considered acceptable, especially for a
Wild oats are weeds found in cornfields price. British
which resemble cultivated oats: spending
time sowing them would be a foolish or shout the odds talk loudly and in an
useless activity. The expression has been opinionated way. 
current since the late 16th century; from thewhat the odds? what does it matter? informal
mid 16th to the early 17th century, wild oat
was also used as a term for a dissolute young j: man. odour
be in good or bad odour with someone be
in or out of favour with someone. 
object odour of sanctity Qa state of holiness,
no object not influencing or restricting sanctimoniousness, derogatory
choices or decisions. 
1998 Independent a very impulsive buyer, if This expression is a translation of the
see something buy it, money no object. French idiom odeur de sainteté. It refers to a
sweet or balsamic odour which was reputedly
emitted by the bodies of saints at or after
Occam death, and which was regarded as evidence
of their sanctity. Occam razor the principle that in explain-207 on
off the old boy network mutual assistance,
especially preferment in employment,
off and on intermittently; now and then. shown among those with a shared social
off and running making good progress. and educational background. 
the old days a period in the past, often seen
offence as significantly different from the present,
a hanging offence: see HANGING. especially noticeably better or worse. 
old enough to be someone father or
office mother of a much greater age than
good offices help and support, often given someone, informal
by exercising your influence. 1997 Nelson DeMille Plum Island He was
2002 Daily Telegraph Mr Blair will probably old enough to be their father, but
demonstratively use his good offices to bring girls paid attention to money, pure and simple. 
round the German and French leaders,
thereby gaining prestige in Washington. an old one a familiar joke. 
just another day at the office boring routine. the old school tie the attitudes of group
1997 Times Professional cricket has been loyalty and traditionalism associated with
reduced to just another day at the office. wearing the tie of a particular public
school. British
offing old Spanish customs: see SPANISH. 
in the offing nearby; likely to happen or an old wives tale a widely held traditional
appear soon. belief that is now thought to be unscientific
This expression originated as a nautical or incorrect. 
term for a distance offshore, beyond a The phrase and its earlier variant old
harbour or anchoring ground. It has been wives fable is recorded from the early 16th
used figuratively since the late 18th century. century, with the earliest example being from Tyndale translation of the Bible. oil play Old Harry with: see play the devil with
burn the midnight oil: see BURN. at DEVIL. 
oil someone palm: see grease someone  
palm at GREASE. olive
no oil painting not very attractive. British hold out or offer an olive branch offer a
informal token of peace or goodwill. 
oil and water two elements, factors, or A branch of an olive tree is an emblem of people that do not agree or blend together. peace. In the Bible, it was the token brought by a dove to Noah to indicate that God sO Water and oil are two liquid substances
anger was assuaged and that the flood hadthat repel each other and cannot be mixed
abated Genesis 8:11. together. 
oil the wheels help something go smoothly. 
on
pour oil on troubled waters: see POUR. be on about talk about tediously and at
length. British informalold
be on at someone nag or grumble at
any old how in no particular order. someone. British informal
come the old soldier: see SOLDIER. be on to someone be close to discovering the
make old bones: see BONE. truth about an illegal or undesirable
of the old school traditional or old activity that someone is engaging in. fashioned. 
informal1998 Imogen de la Bere The Last Deception of
PalliserWentwood He came of the old school, in be on to something have an idea or
which men did not weep in front of other men. information that is likely to lead to an
the old Adam: see ADAM. important discovery, informal
old as the hills: see ancient as the hills at it not on it impractical or unacceptable. 
HILL. informal
on and off intermittently; now and then. once 208
on it drinking heavily. Australian informal public enemy number one: see PUBLIC. 
on side supporting or part of the same team rolled into one: see ROLLED. 
as someone else. take care of number one: see NUMBER. 
1997 Spectator And while clearly on side with
New Labour, he has never been a closelyquartered insider. one-horse
you re on said by way of accepting a one-horse race a contest in which one
challenge or bet. informal candidate or competitor is clearly
superior to all the others and seems certainonce to win. 
1995 Sun Baltimore The Rangers, who haveonce a —, always a — a person cannot
won six of their last seven, could make it a one change their fundamental nature. 
horse race in a hurry. 1993 Margaret Atwood The Robber Bride
She was once a Catholic... and once a one-horse town a small town with few and
Catholic, always a Catholic, according to poor facilities, informal
her mother. once and for all or once for all now and for onion
the last time; finally. know your onions be fully knowledgeable
once and future denoting someone or about something, informal
something that is eternal, enduring, or
Onions is perhaps short for rhyming slang constant. ! onion rings, meaning things. The phrase
This expression comes from T. dates from the 1920s. 
White The Once and Future King 1958,a series of novels about the Arthurian
legends. openbe open with speak frankly to; conceal
once bitten, twice shy a bad experience
nothing from. makes you wary of the same thing
happening again. an open book: see a closed book at CLOSED. 
in or into the open out of doors; not under
This expression dates from the late 19thcover, not subject to concealment or
century. A variant common in the USA is once 
burned, twice shy. obfuscation; made public. 
open-and-shut of a case or argumentonce or every once in a while from time to
admitting no doubt or dispute;time; occasionally. 
1989 Annie Dillard The Writing Life Every once straightforward and conclusive. 
in a while Rahm saw a peephole in the clouds open sesame a marvellous or irresistible
and buzzed over for a look. means of achieving access to what would
normally be inaccessible. 
one In the tale of Ali Baba and the Forty
Thieves in the Araban Nights, thedoorofthe !
get something in one understand or succeed robbers cave was made to open by uttering !
in guessing something immediately. this magic formula. 
informal
one on one or one to one denoting or with your eyes open or with open eyes
referring to a situation in which two parties fully aware of the risks and other
come into direct contact, opposition, or implications of an action or situation. 
correspondence. 1995 Represent wanna speak to God one on opener
one me and him. for openers to start with; first of all. 
the one that got away something desirable informal
that has eluded capture. 
This phrase comes from the angler opium
traditional way of relating the story of a largethe opium of the people or masses
fish that has managed to escape after almost something regarded as inducing a false and
being caught: you should have seen the one unrealistic sense of contentment among
that got away. people. 209 overdrive
This idiom is a translation of the German 1997 A. Sivanandran When Memory Dies Now
phrase Opium des Volks, used by Karl Marx in the land had been taken from him... He was
1844 in reference to religion. at outs with the world. 
out and about of a person, especially after
opportunity an illness engaging in normal activity. 
opportunity knocks a chance of success out and away by far. 
occurs. out at elbows: see ELBOW. 
This expression comes from the proverb out for having your interest or effort directed
opportunity never knocks twice at any man to; intent on. 
door or opportunity knocks but once. The
form of the saying with opportunity dates
out-Herod Herod: see HEROD. 
from the late 19th century, but fortune was out of it not used or included in
used in the early 19th century and a version of something. astray or distant from the
the saying is recorded in medieval French. centre or heart of anything, extremely
drunk, informaloption out of order: see ORDER. 
keep or leave your options open avoid out of pocket: see POCKET. 
committing yourself. 
1996 Colin Bateman Of Wee Sweetie Mice and out to lunch crazy; insane, informal
Men Have it your way. We ll go to Princetown. out with someone or something an
But keeping my options open. If there exhortation to expel or dismiss someone or
any more trouble... we re out, we re home. something unwanted. 
orange out with it say what you are thinking. 
all Lombard Street to a China orange: see 1993 Margaret Atwood The Robber Bride She
would be so squirrelly with desire—out withLOMBARD. 
it, lust, capital L, the best of the Seven Deadlies
squeeze or suck an orange take all that is —that she scarcely be able to sit still. 
profitable out of something. outdoors
orbit the great outdoors the open air; outdoor life. 
informalinto orbit into a state of heightened
activity, performance, anger, or outside
excitement, informal get outside of eat or drink something, informal
1988 Candia McWilliam A Case of Knives am a 1981 Sam McAughtry Belfast Stories We ll get
greedy girl, not merely swayed but waltzed outside of a feed of bacon and egg and black
into orbit by appearances. pudding. 
on the outside looking in of a personorder excluded from a group or activity. 
orders are orders commands must be
obeyed, however much you may disagree over
with them. over and done with completely finished. 
out of order not in normal sequence. of
a machine not working. of behaviour overboard
improper or unacceptable, informal go overboard be highly enthusiastic. 
behave immoderately; go too far. a tall order: see A L. 
The idea behind this idiom is that of
other half recklesslyjumpingoverthesideof aship into how the other half lives used to express or the water. 
allude to the way of life of a different group
in society, especially a wealthier one. British throw something overboard abandon or
informa iscard something. The idea here is that something thrown
out ! over the side of a ship is lost forever. 
at outs at variance or enmity. 
A North American variant of this overdrive
expression is on the outs. 
Mexican overdrive: see MEXICAN. over-egg 210over-egg owe
over-egg the pudding or cake go too far owe someone one feel indebted to someone. 
embellishing, exaggerating, or doing informal
something. 1990 Paul Auster The Music of Chance guess Excessive quantities of egg in a pudding
owe you one, Floyd said, patting Nashe back
could either make it too rich or cause it not to in an awkward show of gratitude. 
set or cook correctly. own
1998 Spectator This is a noble end, but in her as if you the place an overbearing or
eagerness to reach it Duffy somewhat over- self-important manner, informal
eggs the cake. be your man or a or person act
overplay independently and with confidence. 
overplay your hand spoil your chance of come into its or your own become fully
success through excessive confidence in effective, used, or recognized. 
your position. get your own back take action in retaliation
O In a card game, if you overplay your hand, : for a wrongdoing or insult, informal
you play a hand on the basis of an
hold your own retain a position of strength
overestimate of your likelihood of winning. 
in a challenging situation; not be defeated
or weakened. 
overshoot 1953 Margaret Kennedy Troy Chimneys A young
overshoot or overstep the mark go man so gifted may hold his own very well. 
beyond what is intended or proper; go too oyster
far. the world is your oyster: see . 
p nude photograph appears as part of aPpmind your Ps and Qs: see D. . ï
This sort of photograph is featured on
P C6 page three of the British tabloid newspaper
change of pace a change from what you are The Sun. 
used to. chiefly North American
off the pace behind the leader or leading paid
group a race or contest. p a stop abruptly; destroy, informal
put or something through their
paces make someone or something pain
demonstrate their qualities or abilities. „ „. „ „. „ „„«r „ „ , „ „ „ „ „ „ .„, „
Mno pain, no gain suffering is necessary in
set the pace start a race as the fastest. to achieve something.
lead the way in doing or achieving ;
something. There has been a proverbial association
between pain and gain since at least the late !
stand or stay the pace be able to keep 1 6 a dN PaineS Gaines- a ;
with another or others. the title of a 1648 poem by Robert Herrick. 
The modern form, which dates from the
pack ! 1980s, probably originated as a slogan used in go to the pack deteriorate; go to pieces. : f tness classes. 
Australian & New Zealand informal " " 1 9 ? a speaaZAs the cliché goes"no
1980 Frank Moorhouse Days of Wine and Rage a nn g a n. fact confessional age,
All the places overseas where the British have a a k it a lot of gains for very little
pulled out are going to the pack. pain. 
pack your bag or bags put your belongings a a j jn k a a n or tedious
in a bag or suitcase in preparation for your on or informa
imminent departure. 
pack heat carry a gun. North American informal a a number of vulgar slang
...,. alternatives to neck in this idiom, such as a
pack it in stop what you are doing, informal a in the arse OT_ A a  
pack a punch b capable of hitting withskill or force have a powerful effect. naint
packinq watching paint dry of an activity or
send someone packing make someone experience extremely boring,
leave in an abrupt or peremptory way. pa " the Forth Bridge used to indicate that a
n fo rma task can never be completed. . The steel structure of the Forth Railway
paCWie Bridge in Scotland has required continuous
paddle your canoe be independent and repainting: it is so long that once the painters self-sufficient, informal reach one end, they have to begin again at
: the other. 
1 This expression has been in figurative use j from the early 19th century: it was the title ofpaint the red go out and enjoy yourself
a popular song by Sarah T. Bolton in 1854. flamboyantly, informal
paint yourself into a corner leave yourself nopage means of escape or room to manoeuvre. 
on the same a g of two or more people inp aagreement. 
g three girlUSa model whose nude or semi- nopainting
oil painting: see OIL. 
pair 212remained to ease the lot of humankind. In
pair another account, the box contained all the
another pair of shoes: see SHOE. blessings of the gods which, with the
pair of hands a person seen in terms of their exception of hope, escaped and were lost
when the box was opened. participation in a task. 
1997 Spectator Drummond series... has
pale opened a Pandora box of complaints... 
beyond the pale outside the bounds of about the tide of mediocrity engulfing the art. 
acceptable behaviour. panic button
A pae from Latin palus meaning a press or push or hit the panic button
stake is a pointed wooden post used with respond to a situation by panicking or
others to form a fence; from this it came to taking emergency measures, informal
refer to any fenced enclosure. So, in literal
use, beyond the pale meant the area beyond A panic button is a security device which a fence. The term Pale was applied to various can be used to raise the alarm in an
territories under English control and emergency. 
especially to the area of Ireland under English
jurisdiction before the 16th century. The
earliest reference 1547 to the Pale in Ireland pants
as such draws the contrast between the beat the pants off: see BEAT. 
English Pale and the wyld Irysh : the area by the seat of your pants: see SEAT. 
beyond the pale would have been regarded
as dangerous and uncivilized by the English. 
catch someone with their pants or
trousers down catch someone in an
pale into insignificance lose importance or unprepared state or sexually
value. g situation, informal
scare or bore etc. the pants off someonepalm make someone extremely scared, bored,
cross someone palm with silver: see CROSS. etc. informal
grease someone palm: see GREASE. wearing or in short pants very young. 
have or hold someone in the palm of your informal
hand have someone under your control or A litte boy was traditionally dressed in
shorts before attaining a certain age, when
influence. he would be allowed to wear long trousers. 
read someone palm tell someone fortuneby looking at the lines on their palm. paper
pan make the papers be written about or given
go down the pan reach a stage of abject attention as news. 
failure or uselessness. not worth the paper it is written on of an
1997 Ian Rankin Black & Blue My company  
ust about given up trying to sell to the oil agreement, promise, etc. of no value or
industry. They rather buy Yank or validity whatsoever. 
Scandinavian... no wonder Scotland down on paper Qui writing, in theory rather
the pan. than in reality. pancake paper over the cracks disguise problems or
flat as a pancake completely flat. divisions rather than trying to solve them. 
The phrase is a translation of a German
Pandora expression used by the statesman Otto von
Bismarck in a letter of 1865, and early uses
a Pandora box a process that once begun refer to this. 
generates many complicated problems. a paper tiger an apparently dangerous but
In Greek mythology, Pandora was the first actually ineffectual person or thing. 
mortal woman. One story recounts that she
was created by Zeus and sent to earth with a This expression became well known in the ;
box or jar of evils in revenge for the fact that West from its use by Mao Zedong, the
Prometheus had disobediently given the gift Chinese Communist leader. In an interview in of fire to the earth. She let all the evils out of 1946, he expressed the view that all
the container to infect the earth; only hope reactionaries are paper tigers. 
213 party
1998 Oldie We fear that the Rail Regulator and 1998 Times People who won the initial
the Consultative Committee are paper tigers franchises have made the money... Any
and a waste of time. movement from now on is just a game of pass
the parcel, really. paper bagsomeone couldn — their way out of a pare
paper bag a person is completely unable to pare something to the bone: see cut
do something, either through ineptitude or something to the bone at BONE. 
weakness, informal1999 Time Out N. Y. The problem is, he also, at parenthesis
the time, loved Victoria Tennant, and she can in parenthesis as a digression or after act her way out of a paper bag even if you soakthought. 
it with a hose first. par part
above par Oat a premium, better than be part and parcel of be an essential feature
average. or element of. 
Above par is a stock exchange idiom. In Both part and parcel ultimately come
this and the following idioms, par is the Latin from Latin pars meaning part and in this
for equal. phrase they have virtually identical senses. 
The phrase is first recorded in mid 16th at par at face value. century legal parlance; it is now used in
general contexts to emphasize that the item below or under par Oat a discount. mentioned is absolutely integral to the
Q worse than usual, often in relation to a whole. 
person health. 1998 Spectator It not enough for people just
Asa golfing term, under par means to shrug their shoulders and say, Well, that is
better than usual : see par for the course part and parcel of being in public life. 
below. a man of many parts a man showing great
on a par with equal in importance or quality ability in many different areas. 
to; on an equal level with. part brass rags with: see RAG. 
1998 Spectator Imagine learning that the MCC part company of two or more people
had been used for 200 years as a front for cease to be together; go in different
procuring under-age boys... The scandal of
the Tour de France is roughly on a par with directions, of two or more parties cease
such a revelation. to associate with each other, usually as the
result of a disagreement. par for the course what is normal or
expected in any given circumstances. take something in good part: see GOOD. 
In golf, par is the number of strokes that a particular
first-class player would normally require to a London particular: see LONDON. 
get round a particular course. 
up to par at an expected or usual level orparting
quality. a or the parting of the ways a point at
1989 Randall Kenan A Visitation of Spirits Why which two people must separate or at
not him? Did he not look okay? Did he smell which a decision must be taken. 
bad? Have bad breath? Were his clothes not up
This phrase has its origins in Ezekiel 2 1 : 2 1 :
to par? the king of Babylon stood at the parting of
the way, at the head of the two ways. 
parcelpass the parcel a situation in which
movement or exchange takes place, but no party
one gains any advantage. the party over a period of success, good
fortune, or happiness has come to an end. 
Pass the parcel is the name of a children game in which a parcel is passed round to the :informal
accompaniment of music. When the music1998 Independent Until the Government
stops, the child holding the parcel is allowed decided yesterday that the party over, it was
to open it. seemingly routine procedure for our hospital
consultants to have... the Committee onpass 214
Distinction Awards, which is dominated by otherwise get through the obstacle turn the 
the consultants, look after their interests. pass. In the mid 19th century it was
considered to be an Irish expression meaning betray your fellow countrymen by selling
pass information to the authorities. 
come to a pretty pass: see PRETTY. 
1996 Economist Having sold the pass on the
head or cut someone or something off at referendum, will he really be able to hold the
the pass forestall someone or something, pass on responsible economics?
especially at a critical moment or at the lastpossible moment. passage
Pass is used here in the sense of a narrow passage of or at arms a fight or dispute. 
route through mountains. work your passage work in return for a free
place on a voyage. 
pass the baton: see BATON. 
pass the buck: see BUCK. past
pass by on the other side avoid having not put it past someone believe someone to
anything to do with something that should be psychologically capable of doing
demand your attention or concern. something, especially something you
consider wrong or rash. This expression refers to the parable of
the good Samaritan, recounted in Luke 10. A
past it too old to be of any use or any good at
man travelling from Jerusalem to Jericho was anything, informal
attacked and robbed during the course of his
journey. He was left lying by the road and the pasture
first two people who saw him passed by on put someone out to pasture force someone
the other side of the road. It was the third to retire. 
traveller, the Samaritan a man from Samaria who helped him. pat
pass the hat round: see HAT. have something off or down pat have
pass in a crowd be not conspicuously below something memorized perfectly. 
the average, especially in terms of on your pat on your own. Australian informal
appearance. This expression is from rhyming slang, Pat pass in your ally die. Australian informal Malone meaning alone. 

In this phrase, an ally is a toy marble made pat someone on the back express approval
of marble, alabaster, or glass. 
of or admiration for someone. 
pass muster: see MUSTER. stand pat stick stubbornly to your opinion or
pass someone lips: see LIP. decision, chiefly North American
pass the parcel: see PARCEL. In the card games poker and blackjack,
pass the time of day: see TIME. standing pat involves retaining your hand as dealt, without drawing other cards. pass your sell-by date reach a point where
you are useless or worn out. informal
patch
A sell-by date is that stamped on not a patch on greatly inferior to. British
perishable goods indicating the latest date informal
on which they may be sold. 
1991 Mavis Nicholson Martha Jane & Me We
1998 Spectator He would probably have to turn thought the uniform of our soldiers was
on them his colleagues when, in his view, pathetic , not a patch on the American
they had passed their sell-by date. soldiers uniform. 
sell the pass betray a cause. British a purple patch: see PURPLE. 
Asinhead someone off at the pass above, :
pass is here used in the sense of a narrowpath
route through mountains, viewed as a lead someone up the garden path: see
strategic point in time of war. Selling the pass GARDEN. 
was supplying information to the enemy that the path of least resistance: see the line of
would enable them to circumvent or
least resistance at RESISTANCE. 215 pebblepatter pea
the patter of tiny feet used to refer to the like peas or like as two peas in a pod so
expectation of the birth of a baby. similar as to be indistinguishable or nearly
2002 Pride If, like me, you find yourself single so. 
in the penultimate year of your twenties and
the only patter of tiny feet is your neighbour peace
cat, then chop, chop ladies—so much to do sohold your peace remain silent about
little time. something. pause keep the peace refrain or prevent others
give pause to someone or give someone from disturbing civil order. 
pause for thought cause someone tono peace for the wicked: see WICKED. 
think carefully or hesitate before doing
something. peach
a peach of a — a particularly excellent or
pave desirable thing of the kind specified, informal
pave the way for create the circumstances to
enable something to happen or be done. Peach has been used since the mid 18th
century as a colloquial term for an attractive young woman and more generally since the pay mid 19th century for anything of exceptional it always pays to—it produces good results quality. 
to do a particular thing. 
1994 Guns & Shooting A custom handgun can 1998 Spectator Neil Pollard... rode a peach of a
race... to win the two-mile marathon. 
be a big investment so it always pays to choose
the right pistolsmith. peaches and cream of a girl complexion
pay its or their way of an enterprise or of a cream colour with downy pink
person earn enough to cover its or their cheeks. costs. pearl
pay the piper pay the cost of an enterprise. cast or throw pearls before swine give or
informal
offer valuable things to people who do not
This expression comes from the proverb appreciate them. 
he who pays the piper calls the tune, and is
used with the implication that the person This expression is a quotation from
Matthew 7:6: Give not that which is holy
who has paid expects to be in control of
unto the dogs, neither cast ye your pearlswhatever happens. 
before swine, lest they trample them under
their feet, and turn again and rend you. 
pay your respects make a polite visit tosomeone. 
A similar expression is pay your lastpearly
respects, meaning show respect towards a pearly whites a person teeth. British informal
dead person by attending their funeral. 
pear-shaped
pay through the nose pay much more than a go pear-shaped go wrong, informal
fair price, informal
1998 Country Life We pay a lot of money for a This phrase originated as RAF slang, as a
fairly ordinary garment in order to advertise a humorously exaggerated allusion to the
name that is only well-known because we pay shape of an aircraft that has crashed nose
through the nose for the huge advertising first. Today, however, people probably
budget. assume it derives from the idea of a woman
gaining weight on her hips. 
you pays your money and you takes your
choice used to convey that there is little to 1998 Spectator Unfortunately it all went pear choose between one alternative and shaped because the programme to which was
another. going to peg my babblings... just wasn t
interesting enough to sustain a whole review. 
Both pays and takes are non-standard,
colloquial forms, retained from the original pebble
version of the saying in a Punch joke of 1846. !
not the only pebble on the beach not thepecker 216
only person to be considered in a particular Pelion
situation; of a former lover not unique or pile or heap Pelion on Ossa add an
irreplaceable. extra difficulty or task to an already
This expression is from an 1897 song title: difficult situation or undertaking, literary
You re Not The Only Pebble On The Beach. 
The original context was that of courtship: In Greek mythology, the mountain Pelion ;
the way to advance your suit was to make it was held to be the home of the centaurs, and 
plain to the lady that she not the only the giants were said to have piled Mounts
pebble on the beach. It is now often used Olympus and Ossa on its summit in their
more generally as a warning against selfish attempt to reach the heavens and destroy the egocentricity. gods. pecker pelt
keep your pecker up remain cheerful. British at full pelt with great speed; as fast as
informal possible. 
Pecker is probably being used here in the in your pelt naked. Irish informal
sense of a bird beak or bill , and by
extension a person face or expression. The pen
phrase has been current in British English dip your pen in gall: see DIP. 
since the mid 19th century, but it has rather the pen is mightier than the sword writing is
different connotations in the US, where
pecker is an informal term for penis. 
more effective than military power or
violence, proverbpedal penny
with the pedal to the metal with the count the or your pennies be careful about
accelerator of a car pressed to the floor. how much you spend. 
North American informal
Variants of this expression are watch the 
pennies and, in the USA, pinch the pennies. 
peedearn an honest penny: see HONEST. 
peed off annoyed or irritated, informal
in for a penny, in for a pound used to express
Pee represents the initial letter of piss, someone intention to see an undertaking
and the phrase is used euphemistically as a
slightly less vulgar expression than pissed off. 
through, however much time, effort, ormoney this entails. 
not have a penny to bless yourself with bepeg completely impoverished, dated
off the peg of clothes ready-made as This expression refers either to the cross
opposed to specially made for a particular on the silver pennies which circulated in
person, chiefly British England before the reign of Charles II or to
A North American variant of this phrase is the practice of crossing a person palm with off the rack. silver for luck. 
a peg to hang a matter on something used as the penny drops someonefinallyrealizes
a pretext or occasion for the discussion or or understands something, informal, chieflyBritish
treatment of a wider subject. 
a square peg in a round hole a person in a The image here is of the operation of a
coin-operated slot machine. situation unsuited to their abilities or
character. not have two pennies to rub together lack
The variant a round peg in a square hole is money; be very poor. 
also found, although it is less common. 
a penny for your thoughts used to ask
take someone down a peg or two someone what they are thinking about. 
make someone realize that they are less informal
talented or important than they think pennies from heaven unexpected benefits,
they are. especiallyfinancialones. 
217 pick
Pennies from Heaven was the title of a perspective
1936 song by the American songwriter
ohnny Burke 1908-64. The expression is
in or out of perspective of a work of art
also well known as the title of a BBC drama showing the right or wrong relationship
series by Dennis Potter in the late 1970s. between visible objects, correctly or
incorrectly regarded in terms of relativepenny wise and pound foolish careful importance. 
and economical in small matters whilebeing wasteful or extravagant in large petard
ones. hoist with or by your own petard have
a pretty penny: see T Y. your plans to cause trouble for others
backfire on you. 
spend a penny urinate. British informal
The phrase is from Shakespeare Hamlet: 
Atone time coin-operated locks were For tis the sport to have the enginer Hoist
commonly found on the doors of public with his own petard. In former times, a
lavatories. The phrase is now rather dated. petard was a small bomb made of a metal or wooden box filled with explosive powder,
turn up like a bad penny of someone or while hosf here is the past participle of the
something unwelcome inevitably dialect verb hoise, meaning lift or remove. 
reappear or return. A bad penny is a counterfeit coin which phut
circulates rapidly as people try to pass it on to someone else. go phut fail to work properly or at all. informal
Phut is usually considered to be imitative
two or ten a penny plentiful or easily of a dull, abrupt sound, like that made by a
obtained and consequently of little value. rifle or a machine breaking down. In fact, its !
chiefly British earliest recorded use is by Rudyard Kipling in the late 19th century, and the context makes it percentage likely that it was an Anglo-Indian word from Hindi and Urdu phatnâ meaning to burst. 
play the percentages or the percentage
game choose a safe and methodical course
of action when calculating the odds in physical
favour of success, informal get physical become aggressive or violent.
become sexually intimate with someone,perch take exercise, informal
knock someone off their perch cause
someone to lose a position of superiority or physician
pre-eminence, informal physician, heal thyself before attempting
to correct others, make sure that you
perish aren guilty of the same faults yourself. proverb
perish the thought used, often ironically, to
show that you find a suggestion or idea 1 This expression alludes to Luke 4:23: And completely ridiculous or unwelcome. he said unto them, Ye will surely say unto me informal this proverb, Physician, heal thyself:
1993 Tablet Is he one of those people who file whatsoever we have heard done in
their own press cuttings and who even, perish Capernaum, do also here in thy country. 
the thought, write down their own witticisms?permitting pick
pick and choose select only the best or most
— permitting if the specified thing does not desirable or appropriate from among a
prevent you from doing something. number of alternatives. 
1997 Classic Boat Time and weather permitting
rudderless sailing is also taught, along with pick someone brains or brain question
spinnaker and trapezing. someone who is better informed about a
subject than yourself in order to obtainperson information, informal
be your own person: see be your own man at pick something clean completely remove
OWN. the flesh from a bone or carcass. picnic 218
pick up the pieces restore your life or a someone what you think, especially when
situation to a more normal state, typically you are angry about their behaviour. 
after a shock or disaster. go to pieces become so nervous or upset that
pick up the threads resume something that you are unable to behave or perform
has been interrupted. normally. 
in one piece unharmed or undamaged,picnic especially after a dangerous journey or
be no picnic be difficult or unpleasant, informal
2001 Rant While Cheung looks elegant... in experience. 
the 25 different versions of the cheongsam dress pick or pull or tear someone or something
she wears in thefilm,moving in the garments to pieces criticize someone or something
was no picnic. in a severe or detailed way. 
a piece or slice of the action a share
picture in the excitement of something. a
be or look a picture of a person or thing be share in the profits from something. 
beautiful. informal
get the picture understand a situation. a piece of ass or tail a woman regarded in
informalsexual terms, vulgar slang
in the picture fully informed aboutsomething. a piece of cake: see CAKE. 
out of the picture no longer involved; say your piece give your opinion or a
irrelevant. prepared statement. 
a or the picture of — the embodiment of a pierce
specified state or emotion. pierce someone heart affect someone
1989 Woman Realm The... little girl looks a keenly or deeply. 
picture of health in her blue dungarees and pig
red boots. bleed like a stuck pig bleed copiously. 
pretty as a picture: see PRETTY. bring or drive your pigs to market succeed
pie in realizing your potential. 
easy as pie: see EASY. in a pig eye expressing scornfu isbelief at
eat humble pie: see HUMBLE. a statement, informal, chiefly North American
1987 Evelyn Smith Miss Melville Returns Under
nice or sweet as pie extremely nice or other circumstances think we could have
agreeable. been friends. In a pig eye, Susan thought. 
a piece or slice of the pie a share in an make a pig of yourself overeat, informal
amount of money or business regarded as 1991 Francis King The Ant Colony do love
chocolates. Always make a pig of myself oversomething to be divided up. them. 
pie in the sky something that is agreeable to make a pig ear of bungle; make a mess of. 
contemplate but very unlikely to be British informal
realized, informalThis probably developed with humorous This phrase comes from a 1911 song by
reference to the phrase make a silk purse out the American labour leader Joe Hill
of a sow ear see SILK. 
1879-1915, in which a preachertells a slave: Work and pray, live on hay. You ll get pie in the sky when you die. 
on the pig back living a life of ease and
luxury; in a very fortunate situation. Irishinformal
piece pig or piggy in the middle a person who is
all of a piece with something entirely placed in an awkward situation between
consistent with something. two others, chiefly British
1997 Edmund White The Farewell Symphony
This new disease seemed all of a piece with the This expression comes from the name of a hate promulgated by know-nothing American game in which two people attempt to throw fundamentalists. a ball to each other without a third person in jthe middle catching it. 
give someone a piece of your mind tell219 pin
a pig in a poke something that is bought or pile
accepted without knowing its value or
at the top of the pile: see at the top of the
seeing it first. 
heap at HEAP. 
In this expression, a pore is a small sack or make a or your pile become rich, informal
bag, a sense which is now found chiefly in
Scottish use. P7e here means a pile of money. 
1996 John Doran Red Doran didn want pile it on exaggerate for effect, informal
to sell the fellow a pig in a poke, so pile on the agony exaggerate or aggravate a
explained that the ducks were bred onlyfor laying. bad situation, informal
pigs might or can fly used ironically to pill
express disbelief, chiefly British a bitter pill to swallow an unpleasant or
Pigs fly in the air with their tails forward painful necessity to accept. 
was a proverbial saying in the 17th century; 1996 European The move, while not entirely
the current version dates back to the late 19th unexpected, has been a bitter pill to swallow. 
century, and the first recorded use is by Lewissugar or sweeten the pill make an
Carroll. unpleasant or painful necessity more
1973 Jack Higgins A Prayer for the Dying acceptable. 
Something could come out of that line ofThe image here is of making bitter-tasting !
enquiry. know... Pigs might also fly. medicine more palatable by adding sugar. 
squeal or yell like a stuck pig squeal or yell
loudly and shrilly. pillar
A stuckpig is one that is being butchered from pillar to post from one place to another
by having its throat cut; compare with bleed in an unceremonious or fruitless manner. 
like a stuck pig above. 
This expression may have developed with sweat like a pig sweat profusely, informal reference to the rebounding of a ball in a
real-tennis court. It has been in use in this
form since the mid 16th century, though its
pigeon earlier form, from post to pillar, dates back to be someone pigeon be someone concern the early 15th century. 
or affair. 
2002 Independent There will be a single door to
n this phrase, the word pigeon derives knock on so people with a point to make are
from pidgin, as in pidgin English, the term for not passed endlessly from pillar to post. 
a grammatically simplified form of a a pillar of society a person regarded as a
language used for communication between particularly responsible citizen. 
people not sharing a common language. 
Pidgin itself represents a Chinese alteration The use of p7ar to mean a person
of the English word business : it entered the regarded as a mainstay or support for
English language with the meaning something is recorded from medieval times; occupation or affairs in the early 19th P7ars of Society was the English title of an
century, emerging from the hybrid of English 1888 play by the Norwegian dramatist Henrik and other languages used at that time Ibsen. 
between Europeans and the Chinese fortrading purposes. pilot
drop the pilot abandon a trustworthy
pike adviser. 
come down the pike appear on the scene;
come to notice. North American Dropping the Pilot was the caption of a
famous cartoon by John Tenniel, published in In this expression, a pTce is short for Punch in 1890. It depicted Bismarck  
turnpike , the American term for a dismissal as German Chancellor by the young motorway on which a toll is charged. Kaiser Wilhelm II. 
1983 Ed McClanahan The Natural Man He was,
in a word, the most accomplished personage pin
who yet come down the pike in all the days clean or neat as a new pin extremely clean
of Harry ladhood. or neat. pinch 220
for two pins d, she d, etc. — used to 1976 Scotsman feel it my duty but not
indicate that you are very tempted to do keen. My grandchildren give me the pip. 
something, especially out of annoyance. pip someone at or to the post defeat
1997 Spectator Certainly it is a fierce someone at the last moment. 
dog... What is more, for two pins it would
bite us again. p was an informal late 19th-century
term for defeat , but it is uncertain from
pin your colours to the mast: see COLOURS. which sense of the noun pip it derives. Post
on pins and needles in an agitated state of here isthe winning post in a race. 
suspense. squeeze someone until the pips squeak
Pins and needles isthe pricking ortingling : extract the maximum amount of money
sensation in a limb recovering from from someone. British
numbness. 
This expression alludes to a speech made ;
you could hear a pin drop there was absolute in 1918 by the British politician Sir Eric
silence or stillness. Geddes on the subject of Germany payment ;
of indemnities after World War I: The
pin your ears back listen carefully. Germans... are going to pay every penny;
they are going to be squeezed as a lemon is
pinch squeezed—until the pips squeak. More
at a pinch if necessary; in an emergency. recently, in the 1970s, the Labour Chancellor Denis Healey declared his intention to
A North American variant of this squeeze the rich until the pips squeaked. 
expression is in a pinch. feel the pinch experience hardship, pipe
especially financial. put that in your pipe and smoke it used to
take something with a pinch of salt: see SALT. indicate that someone should accept what
has been said, even if it is unwelcome. pineapple informal
the rough end of the pineapple bad 1947 W. Somerset Maugham Creatures of
treatment. Australian & New Zealand informal Circumstance engaged to her, so put that in
1981 Peter Barton Bastards Have Known There your pipe and smoke it. 
was no way that was going to get the rough
end of the pineapple fromWally, so kept out pipeline
of his way. in the pipeline being planned or developed;
about to happen. 
pink 1992 Sunday Times of India In effect, this means
in the pink in extremely good health and that two bio-pics on Buddha are in the pipeline
spirits, informal for release in 1993. 

Literally, a pink is a plant with sweet- pipingsmelling pink or white flowers and slender
piping hot very hot. leaves. In figurative use, the pink came to
mean a supreme example of something , as Piping describes the hissing or sizzling
in Shakespeare Romeo and Juliet. am the noise made by food taken very hot from the very pink of courtesy. This led to the : oven. The phrase was earliest used by
development of the phrase in the pink of : Chaucer in The Miller Tale: And wafres,
condition, of which in the pink is a shortened pipyng hoot out of thegleede gleede is an !
version. obsolete word for a fire. 

1997 Sunday Times Try the chilli cakes... 
pip served piping hot from food stalls on the
give someone the pip make someone beach. irritated or depressed, informal, dated
p vulgar slang
Pip is a disease of poultry or other birds. In not have a pot to piss in be very poor. North
the late 15th century the word came to be
used, often humorously, of various ill- American
defined or minor ailments suffered by people a piece of piss a very easy thing to do. British
and so the informal sense of ill humour piss in the wind do something that is
developed. 
ineffective or a waste of time. 
221 plate
take the piss out of mock someone or 1991 Francis King The Ant Colony Guido is
something. British going to go places, sure of it. He not going
1998 Spectator It must be admitted, however, to be a labourer forever. 
that any child who tried nowadays to follow place in the sun a position of favour or
my priggish example would, probably rightly, advantage. 
be accused at once of taking the piss. 
In 1897 the German Chancellor, Prince
Bernhard Von Bulow, made a speech in the
p G vulgar slang Reichstag in which he declared: we desire
pissed as a newt or fart very drunk. to throw no one into the shade in East Asia , butwealsodemandourplaceinthesun. Asapissed off annoyed; irritated. 
result, the expression has become associated with German nationalism; it is in fact
pit recorded much earlier and is traceable to the
writings of the French mathematician andbe the pits be extremely bad or the worst of
philosopher Blaise Pascal 1623-62. 
its kind, informal2002 India Weekly think it is a great feeling, to
Pits is a mid 20th-century informal term know that after years of derision from the
for armpits and has connotations of body world, the Hindifilmindustry is achieving its
odour; from this it came to refer generally to place in the sun. 
something regarded as bad or unpleasant. 
dig a pit for: see DIG. 
plainplain as day or the nose on your face very
the pit of your or the stomach an ill defined region of the lower abdomen seen obvious, informal
as the seat of strong feelings, especially plain as a pikestaff very obvious. 
anxiety. ordinary or unattractive in appearance. This phrase is an alteration of plain as a
pitch packstaff, which dates from the mid 16thcentury, the staff being that of a pedlar, on
make a pitch make a bid to obtain a contract
which he rested his pack of goods for sale. 
or other benefit. The version with pikestaff had developed by !
the end of the 16th century
Pitch is used here in the late 19th-century colloquial sense of a sales pitch. planpitched plan B: see B. 
a pitched battle afiercefight. planet
Literally, a pitched battle is one fought onwhat planet are you on? used to indicate
a predetermined ground the pitch, as that someone is out of touch with reality. 
opposed to either a casual skirmish or a
British informalrunning battle see RUNNING. plank
pitchfork thick as two planks: see THICK. 
rain pitchforks: see rain cats and dogs at walk the plank lose your job or position. 
RAIN. The image here is ofthetraditional fate of the victims of pirates: being forced to walk
pity blindfold along a plank overthe side of aship more the pity used to express regret about a to your death in the sea. 
fact that has just been stated, informal1994 Amstrad Anion The full version of this
game never got released. More the pity, as if plate
the demo anything to go by, it would have on a plate with little or no effort from the
been a stormer. person concerned, informal
1986 Max Egremont Dear Shadows They were
handed an asset on a plate and treated it in a
place totally uncreative way. 
go places travel, be increasingly on your plate occupying your time or
successful, informal energy, chiefly British
platinum 222
1999 Vikram Seth Equal Music At the moment, play for time use specious excuses or
may as well tell you, it ll be a relief not to do it. 
ve got a lot on my plate—too much. unnecessary manoeuvres to gain time. 
play the game: see GAME. 
platinum play the goat: see GOAT. 
go platinum of a recording achieve sales play God: see GOD. 
meriting a platinum disc. play havoc with: see HAVOC. 
play hell with: see HELL. play play hookey: see HOOKEY. 
play your cards close to your chest: see play a or your hunch make an instinctive
keep your cards close to your chest at choice. 
CARD. play into someone hands act in such a way
make a play for attempt to attract or attain. as unintentionally to give someone an
informal advantage. 
1999 Independent Trade was seen... heading play it cool make an effort to be or appear to
out for a club to make a play for a cute barman. be calm and unemotional, informal
make great play of or with draw
play the market speculate in stocks. 
attention to in an ostentatious manner,
typically to gain prestige or advantage. play possum: see POSSUM. 
2002 Daily Telegraph With the tabloids leading play or play it safe or for safety take
the way, reporters digging into their precautions; avoid risks. 
backgrounds made great play of their play something by ear perform music
unorthodox pasts. without having to read from a score. 
play your ace: see ACE. proceed instinctively according to
play ball: see BALL. results and circumstances rather than
according to rules or a plan, informal
play a blinder perform very well, informalG1992 Paul Auster Leviathan The only
Dating from the 1950s, blinder is a condition was that Sachs arrive at Maria  
colloquial term for a dazzlingly good piece house promptly at ten clock, and from then
of play in sport, especially in rugby or cricket, on they would play it by ear. 
2001 Sun Gilles will start and would just love play to the gallery: see GALLERY. 
him to play a blinder and score a couple of play with fire take foolish risks. 
goals to knock Southampton out of the cup. play yourself in become accustomed
play both ends against the middle keep your to the circumstances and conditions
options open by supporting or favouring of a game or activity; get into a rhythm
opposing sides. or pattern of working or performing. British
play by the rules follow what is generally
held to be the correct line of behaviour. playing
play your cards right: see CARD. a level playing field: see LEVEL. 
play the devil with: see DEVIL. not playing with a ful eck: see DECK. 
play ducks and drakes with: see DUCK. 
play fair observe principles of justice; avoid please
cheating. as — as you please used to emphasize the
play someone false prove treacherous or degree to which someone or something
possesses the specified quality, especially
deceitful towards someone; let someone
when this is seen as surprising, informal
down. 1989 Marilynne Robinson Mother Country
play fast and loose behave irresponsibly or Hearing themselves expound as slick as you
immorally. please on every great question of the age... 
1998 Spectator Fingers may point at those they must feel that their gift to the world of
custodians playing fast and loose with the enlightenment exculpates the racism. 
national treasure. play favourites show favouritism towards pleased
someone or something, chiefly North American pleased as punch: see PUNCH. 
play the field: see FIELD. 223 pocketpleasure plum
at Her or His Majesty pleasure detained have a plum in your mouth have a rich in a British prison. sounding voice or affected accent. British
like a ripe plum or ripe plums used to
pledge convey that something can be obtained
sign or take the pledge make a solemn with little or no effort. 
undertaking to abstain from alcohol. 
plumb
plight out of plumb not exactly vertical. 
plight your troth pledge your word in 1984 T. Coraghessan Boyle Budding Prospects
marriage or betrothal. His bad eye, noticed, had gone crazy. 
Normally it was just slightly out of plumb. The verb plight is now virtually obsolete
except in this particular phrase, as is the noun plumb the depths reach the extremes of
troth. evil or unhappiness. inquire into the
most obscure or secret aspects ofsomething. plot
lose the plot lose your ability to understand plume
what is happening; lose touch with reality. borrowed plumes: see BORROWED. 
informal1997 Spectator The truth is that we ve lost plunge
the plot of great painting and have entered
take the plunge commit yourself to a course
a new phase in which the criteria for
udging work are... demonstrably shallow of action about which you are nervous. 
and trivial. informal
the plot thickens the situation becomes plus
more difficult and complex. plus-minus more or less; roughly. South African
This expression comes from The Rehearsal 1992 Weekend Post He expected plus-minus 
1671, a burlesque drama by George Villiers, 1000fileswould eventually be forwarded for
2nd Duke of Buckingham: now the plot possible prosecution. 
thickens very much upon us. poach
plough poach on someone territory encroach on
someone else rights. plough a lonely or your own furrow
follow a course of action in which youare isolated or in which you can actpoacher
poacher turned gamekeeper someone who
independently. now protects the interests which they
plough the sand labour uselessly. previously attacked. 
Ploughing the sand has been a proverbial image of fruitless activity since the late 16th pocket
century. have deep pockets have large financialresources, informal
put or set your hand to the plough embark
1998 Spectator In any case, it was never in any
on a task. danger of going out of business... there were
This phrase alludes to Luke 9:62: And several other putative proprietors with deep
esus said unto him, No man, having put his pockets waiting in the wings. 
hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit in pocket having enough money or money
for the kingdom of God. to spare; having gained in a transaction. 
of money gained by someone from a
plug transaction. 
pull the plug: see PULL. in someone pocket dependent on someone
financially and therefore under theirplughole influence; closely involved with someone. 
go down the plughole be unsuccessful, lost, out of pocket having lost money in a
or wasted, informal transaction. poetic 224
pay out of pocket pay for something with pokeyour own money. US
poke fun at tease or make fun of. 
put your hand in your pocket spend or 1989 Basile Kerblay Gorbachev Russia They
provide your own money. used to poke fun at his boorish ways. 
poke your bib in: see stick your bib in at BIB. 
poetic poke your nose into take an intrusive
poetic justice the fact of experiencing a
interest in; pry into, informal
fitting or deserved retribution for your
actions. poke your oar in: see stickyour oar in at OAR. 
take a poke at someone Ohit or punch
This phrase is from Alexander Pope someone, criticize someone. 
satire The Dunciad: Poetic Justice, with her! lifted scale. pole
be poles apart differ greatly in nature orpoint opinion. 
the finer points of: see FINER. in pole position in an advantageous position. 
point the bone at: see BONE. 
l motor racing, pole position is the
point of no return the point in a journey or position on the front row of the starting grid enterprise at which it becomes essential or which will allow the driver to take the first
more practical to continue to the end. bend on the inside. The phrase originated in the 19th century as a horse-racing term,
score points off deliberately make yourself referring to the starting position nearest the appear superior to someone else by making inside boundary rails. clever remarks. 
1986 Jack Batten judges There nothing
condescending or cruel about his wit. He politics
doesn score points off the people in the play politics act for political or personal
prisoners box. He doesn take advantage. gain rather than from principle. 
take someone point accept the validity of derogatorysomeone idea or argument, chiefly British
win on points win by accumulating a series pomp
of minor gains rather than by a single pomp and circumstance the ceremonial
dramatic feat. formality surrounding a public event. 
l boxing, a fighter wins on points by pony
having the referee and judges award him
more points than his opponent, rather than on Shanks pony: see SHANKS PONY. 
by a knockout. poor
poor as a church mouse or as church mice
point-blank extremely poor. 
ask orteil, etc. someone point-blank ask
or tell, etc. someone something very Church mice may be considered to be
directly, abruptly, or rudely. particularly poor or deprived in that they do not have the opportunity to find pickings
In its literal sense point-blank describes a from a kitchen or larder. 
shotorbulletfiredfromveryclosetoitstarget. 
One of the earliest senses of the noun blank poor little rich girl or boy a wealthy young
was the white spot in the centre of a target. : person whose money brings them no
contentment often used as an expressionof mock sympathy. 
poisoned
a poisoned chalice something that is Poor Little Rich Girl was the title of a
apparently desirable but likely to be ! 1925 song by Noel Coward. 
damaging to the person to whom it is given. 
1998 New Scientist Anyone who discovers a the poor man — an inferior or cheaper
superconductor that works at room substitute for the thing specified. 
temperature may be handing the world a 1991 Canberra Times Just as alarming is the
poisoned chalice... the material might be too prospect of FAEs, Fuel-Air Explosives... 
toxic to be usable. known as the poor man atom bomb. 225 pot
poor relation a person or thing that is This expression, recorded from the early
considered inferior or subordinate to ! 19th century in the USA, refers to the
others of the same type or group. opossum habit of feigning death when
1997 Independent on Sunday Many downhillers threatened or attacked possum is an
informal US term for an opossum. 
think of Nordic skiing as a poor relation—fit
only for wimps who can take speed. 
stir the possum stir up controversy; liven
take a poor view of: see take a dim view of things up. Australian informal
at VIEW. post
pop beaten at the post: see BEATEN. 
— a pop costing a specified amount per item. be left at the post: see LEFT. 
North American informal
1999 Tim Lott White City Blue never thought deaf as a post: see deaf as an adder at DEAF. 
d see the day when a curry house would do first past the post: see FIRST. 
Margaritas. The waiter looks delighted. from pillar to post: see PILLAR. 
not surprised at six pounds a pop. 
pip someone at the post: see PIP. 
have or take a pop at physically attack,criticize, informal postal
1995 Musik Two of the girls we rumbled go postal go mad, especially from stress. 
were so outraged that they put upflyersall US informal
over the country taking a pop at us. 
in pop pawn. British informal This expression arose as a result of several recorded cases in the USA in which postal pop the question propose marriage. British service employees ran amok and shot
informal colleagues. 
pop your clogs die. informal
1999 New Yorker A man two seats away went
1998 Oldie We cannot claim any credit for postal when the battery on his cell phone
foreseeing that Enoch was about to pop his gave out. A heavyset passenger had to sit on
clogs. the man until the train finally pulled into
Grand Central. pope
Is the Pope a Catholic? used to indicate that posted
something is blatantly obvious, informal keep someone posted keep someone
informed of the latest developments. 
poppyPosted-up was a mid 19th-century
a tall poppy: see TALL. Americanism meaning well informed. port
any port in a storm in adverse circumstances pot
any source of relief or escape is welcome. for the pot for food or cooking. 
1992 Doris Lessing African Laughter That was
Literally, this expression applies to a ship when we shot for the pot, just shooting what
seeking shelter from rough weather; it has
we needed. been in use as a proverb from at least the mid : 18th century. go to pot deteriorate through neglect, informal
T dea here is of chopping ingredients up into small pieces before putting them in
pose the pot for cooking, and from this comes the strike a pose: see STRIKE. sense be ruined or destroyed. 
possessed keep the pot boiling: see BOILING. 
like someone possessed very violently or the pot calling the kettle black someone
wildly, as if under the control of an evil making criticisms about someone else
spirit. which could equally well apply to
themselves. possum 1998 Times Yet as Guardian insiders point out,
play possum pretend to be asleep or the pot can call the kettle black. She can cry
unconscious when threatened. feign foul when subjected to fair and standard
ignorance. competition. 
potato 226pot of gold: see GOLD. pour
put someone pot on inform on a person. it never rains but it pours: see RAIN. 
Australian & New Zealand informal
pour cold water on: see COLD. 
shit or piss or get off the pot used to pour it on progress or work quickly or with
convey that someone should stop wasting
all your energy. North American informal
time and get on with something, vulgar slangpour oil on troubled waters try to settle a
potato disagreement or dispute with words
intended to placate or pacify thosecouch potato: see COUCH. involved. 
drop someone or something like a hotpotato: see HOT. powderkeep your powder dry be ready for action;
small potatoes: see SMALL. remain alert for a possible emergency. 
Potemkin When his troops were about to cross a
a Potemkin village a sham or unreal thing. river, the English statesman and general
Oliver Cromwell 1599-1658 is said to have
Count Potemkin 1739-91, a favourite of exorted them: Put your trust in God; but
Empress Catherine II of Russia, reputedly mind to keep your powder dry. The powder
ordered a number of fake villages to be built referred to is gunpowder. 
for the empress tour of the Crimea in 1787. 
1998 Independent Instead of keeping its
powder dry for the important things, New
pot luck Labour political fate is being inextricably
take pot luck take a chance that whatever is bound up with events over which mere
politicians can have no control. available will be good or acceptable. 
powder your nose of a woman go to thelavatory. 
pottage
sell something for a mess of pottage sell This is an early 20th-century euphemism, something for a ridiculously small amount. which is now rather dated. The term
powder room has been used since the 1940s This expression comes from the biblical to refer to a ladies toilet in a hotel,
story of Esau, who sold his birthright to his restaurant, or similar public building. 
brother Jacob in return for a dish of lentil
broth Genesis 25:29-34. Mess is a term for a 1972 L. P. Davies What Did Do Tomorrow? ll
serving of semi-liquid food and pottage is an use your bathroom. To powder my nose, as
archaic word for soup or stew. Although the nice girls say. 
phrase is recorded from 1526 it does not take a powder depart quickly, especially in
occur in the Authorized Version of the Bible order to avoid a difficult situation. North
1611; it does, however, appear in chapter
American informalheadings in the Bibles of 1537 and 1539 and
in the Geneva Bible of 1560. 2002 New York Times Why don you take a
powder, jerk, or how you like a knuckle
sandwich?
pound
your pound of flesh an amount you are power
legally entitled to, but which it is morally do someone or something a power of good
offensive to demand. be very beneficial to someone or some thing, informalj The allusion here istoShylock bond with more power to your elbow! said to
the merchant Antonio in Shakespeare The
j Merchant of Venice and to the former encourage someone or express approval of
j insistence that he should receive it, even at their actions. British
the cost of Antonio life. power behind the throne a person who
exerts authority or influence without
pound the pavement move about on foot at
having formal status. 
a steady, regular pace in a town or city. 
1992 New York Times Put yourself in the shoes the powers that be the authorities. 
of someone who... is now out pounding the
ThisphrasecomesfromRomans13:1: the pavement wondering what to settle for in a
powers that be are ordained of God. 
low-wage job. 227 prick
practice suggest that something should be done
old Spanish practices: see old Spanish now rather than later. 
present company excepted excluding thosecustoms at SPANISH. 
who are here now. 
practice makes perfect regular exercise of an
activity or skill is the way to become press
proficient in it. press something home: see drive something
practise home at HOME. 
practise what you preach do what you advise press the flesh of a celebrity or politician
others to do. greet people by shaking hands, informal,
chiefly North American
prawn 2000 New Yorker Clinton seemed... a figure
from the past—a politician made to press the
come the raw prawn: see RAW. flesh, to give speeches in large halls and
negotiate with his opponents in small rooms. prayer
not have a prayer have no chance at all pretty
of succeeding at something, informal
1998 Oldie Show them you can re-programme come to a pretty pass reach a bad or
the computer to eliminate the Millennium regrettable state of affairs. 
Problem and you are in. Confess that you don not just a pretty face intelligent as well as
even know how to turn it on, and you haven t
attractive. a prayer. a pretty penny a large sum of money, informal
preach 1989 Russell Banks Affliction You can probably
get a pretty penny for that place in a year or
preach to the converted advocate somethingtwo. 
to people who already share your
convictions about its merits or importance. pretty as a picture very pretty. 
sitting pretty in an advantageous position or
precious situation, informalprecious little or few extremely little orfew. prey
fall prey to Qbe hunted and killed by. be
pregnant vulnerable to or overcome by. a pregnant pause or silence a pause or
silence that is laden with meaning or price
significance. everyone has their price everyone can be
won over by money. premiuma price on someone head a reward offered
put or place a premium on regard as or
make particularly valuable or important. for someone capture or death. 
1998 New Scientist Enormous forces would price yourself out of the market be unable to
have acted upon the skull and neck, putting a compete commercially. 
premium on size and strength. what price —? Qused to ask what has
become of something or to suggest that
presence something has or would become
presence of mind the ability to remain calm worthless, used to state that something
and take quick, sensible action when faced seems unlikely. 
with difficulty or danger 1 9 1 New Scientist What price modern
medicine with its reliance on the prescription
present pad, and the slavish devotion to pills?
all present and correct used to indicate that
not a single thing or person is missing. prick
1982 Bernard MacLaverty A Time to Dance She kick against the pricks: see KICK. 
began to check it, scraping the coins towards prick up your ears especially of a horse or
her quickly and building them into piles. Al og make the ears stand erect when on the
present and correct, she said. alert. of a person become suddenly
there is no time like the present used to attentive. 
pricking 228
a spare prick at a wedding a person who is woman who is a prince or princess by
out of place or has no role in a particular right of their roya escent. 
situation. British vulgar slang
prisoner
pricking prisoner of conscience a person detained or
a pricking in your thumbs a premonition or imprisoned because of their religious or
foreboding. political beliefs. 
This expression comes from a speech by : This phrase is particularly associated with the Second Witch in Shakespeare Macbeth: ! the campaigns of Amnesty International, a
By the pricking of my thumbs, Something human-rights organization. 
wicked this way comes. 
take no prisoners be ruthlessly aggressive or
uncompromising in the pursuit of your
pride objectives. 
pride goes or comes before a fall if 1998 Times The transition from Formula
you re too conceited or self-important, One to front-whee rive saloon cars was
something will happen to make you look never going to be easy... especially in a
foolish. series where drivers are not known fortaking prisoners. 
This phrase is adapted from Proverbs
16:18: Pride goeth before destruction, and
an haughty spirit before a fall. Goes before pro
here means precedes. the pros and cons the arguments for and
against something; the advantages and
pride of place the most prominent or disadvantages of something. 
important position amongst a group of
things. Pro is Latin for for ; con is an abbreviation 1995 Abdulrazak Gurnah Paradise He was of Latin contra, meaning against. 
brought up in a devout Sikh household in
which the writings of the great Gurus had
pride of place in the family shrine. Procrusteana Procrustean bed something designed to
your pride and joy someone or something of produce conformity by unnatural or
which you are very proud and which is a violent means. 
source of great pleasure. 
In Greek mythology, Procrustes was a
prime robber who tied his victims to a bed, either
stretching or cutting off their legs in order to prime the pump stimulate or support the to make them fit it. 
growth or success of something, especially
by supplying it with money. 1998 Spectator Intellectuals often employ their
intellects for foolish purposes, forcing facts
This phrase is used literally of a onto a Procrustean bed of theory. 
mechanical pump into which a small quantity of water needs to be poured before it can
begin to function. prod
on the prod looking for trouble. North American
1977 Tom Sharpe The GreatPursuit Significance informal
is all... Prime the pump with meaningful
hogwash. prodigalprimrose prodigal son a person who leaves home to
the primrose path the pursuit of pleasure, lead a spendthrift and extravagant way of
especially when it is seen to bring life but later makes a repentant return. 
disastrous consequences. The biblical parable of the prodigal son in Luke 15: 1 1 - 3 2 tells the story of the
The allusion here is to the primrosespendthrift younger son of a wealthy man
path of dalliance to which Ophelia refers in who leaves home and wastes all his money. Hamlet. When he repents of his extravagant ways and returns home, he is joyfully welcomed back
by his father. See also kill the fatted calf
prince at FATTED. 
prince or princess of the blood a a or
229 pullproduction proud
make a production of do something in an do someone proud act in a way that gives
unnecessarily elaborate or complicated someone cause to feel pleased or satisfied,
way. treat someone with lavish generosity orhonour, informalprofession
the oldest profession the practice of providence
working as a prostitute, humorous tempt providence: see fate atTEMPT. 
Politics or the law is sometimes
humorously awarded the status of second
oldest profession , with the sarcastic prune
implication that their practitioners are as prunes and prisms used to denote a prim
immoral and mercenary as society and affected speech, look, or manner. 
traditionally considered prostitutes to be. 
In Charles Dickens Little Dorrit 1857,
Mrs General advocates speaking this phraseprolong aloud in order to give a pretty form to the
prolong the agony cause a difficult or lips  unpleasant situation to last longer thannecessary. public
promise go public Obecome a public company. 
revea etails about a previously private
on a promise of a person confidently
concern. assured of something, especially of having
sexual intercourse with someone, informal in the public eye the state of being known or
of interest to people in general, especially
promise someone the moon: see N. 
through the media. 
promises, promises used to indicate that the public enemy number one a notorious
speaker is sceptical about someone stated wanted criminal. a person or thing
intention to do something, informal regarded as the greatest threat to a group or
community. 
proof 1995 Independent So foods that pile on the
above proof of alcohol having a stronger pounds are seen as Public Enemy Number
than standard strength. One. 
the proof of the pudding is in the eating the
real value of something can be judged only publish
from practical experience or results and publish or perish used to refer to an attitude
not from appearance or theory. or practice existing within academic
Proof here means test , rather than institutions, whereby researchers are
verification. under pressure to publish material in order
to retain their positions or to be deemed
1998 Nigella Lawson How to Eat Don hide successful. 
the fact that you re microwaving it: they
do say the proof of the pudding is in the pudding
eating. 
in the pudding club pregnant. British informalprop puff
prop up the bar spend a considerable timein all your puff in your whole life, informal,
drinking in a pub. informalchiefly Britishprotest pullunder protest after expressing your
like pulling teeth extremely difficult orobjection or reluctance; unwillingly. 
laborious to do. informal
1997 Independent Jon Benet would come to
the Griffin house for her lessons on 2002 Independent It was like pulling teeth in
deportment, disappearing into the the first half. thought we were never going to
basement—sometimes under protest—to score. 
practise Dior turns. pull a face: see make a face at FACE. pulp 230pull a fast one: see FAST. pulse
pull in your horns: see draw in your horns at feel or take the pulse of ascertain the
HORN. general mood or opinion of. 
pull someone leg deceive someone play The image here is of literally determining fully; tease someone. : someone heart rate by feeling and timing
pull the other one used to express a the pulsation of an artery. 
suspicion that you are being deceived or
teased. British informal 1994 Daily Mirror Our new Housing
Monitor... will take the pulse of the housing
A fuller form of this expression is pull the market to keep you informed about the
other one, it got bells on. value of your most precious asset—yourhome. 
1994 Sunday Times Michael Foot receive a
warm ovation from the CBI? Norman Tebbit pump
address a TUC conference? Pull the other one. pump iron exercise with weights, informal
pull out all the stops: see STOP. pull the plug prevent something frompunch
happening or continuing; put a stop to beat someone to the punch anticipate or
something, informal forestall someone actions. 
pleased or proud as Punch feeling great
This phrase alludes to an older type of delight or pride. 
lavatory flush which operated by the pulling out of a plug to empty the contents of the This expression alludes to the self pan into the soil pipe. congratulatory glee displayed by the
grotesque, hook-nosed Punch, anti-hero of
1997 New Scientist And with the first elements the Punch and Judy puppet show. 
of the IS set for launch next year, it hardly
likely Congress will pull the plug on the pull punches: see PULL. 
project. punch above your weight engage in anpull rank: see RANK. 
activity or contest perceived as being
pull strings make use of your influence and beyond your capacity or abilities. 
contacts to gain an advantage unofficially
or unfairly. This is a metaphor from boxing, in which contests are arranged between opponents of An American variant of this expression is nearly equal weight. 
pull wires: the image here and in the next
idiom is of a puppeteer manipulating a 1998 Spectator Post-imperial Britain retains an
marionette by means of its strings. imperial habit of mind... we entertain... an
ambition to punch above our weight. 
1998 New Scientist Behind the scenes, there is punch the time clock Qof an employee
invariably a democratic government or two
pulling strings to keep the cigarette barons in clock in or out. be employed in a
power. conventional job with regular hours. North American
pull the strings be in control of events or of
other people actions. punch someone lights out: see LIGHT. 
pull together cooperate in a task or under- punch your ticket: see TICKET. 
taking. roll with the punches: see ROLL. pull the wool over someone eyes: see WOOL. punt
pull your punches be less forceful, severe, or take or have a punt at have a go at; attempt. 
violent than you could be. Australian & New Zealand informal
pull your socks up: see SOCK. 1998 Times: Magazine However cheerfully
pull your weight do your fair share of work. positive can be about the future, the man
from the Pru isn going to take a punt on mepull yourself together recover control of
living the full term. your emotions. pup
pulp sell someone a pup swindle someone,
beat or smash someone to a pulp beat especially by selling them something that
someone severely. is worthless. British informal
231 put
This phrase originated in the early 20th a purple patch an ornate or elaborate passage
century; the idea behind it is presumably that in a literary composition. 
of dishonestly selling someone a young and
inexperienced dog when an older, trained This term is a translation of Latin
animal had been expected. purpureus pannus, and comes from the
Roman poet Horace Ars Poetica: Works of
1930 W. Somerset Maugham Cakes and Ale The serious purpose and grand promises often
public has been sold a pup too often to take have a purple patch or two stitched on, to
unnecessary chances. shine far and wide. 
purdahin purdah in seclusion. purposeaccidentally on purpose apparently by
Purdah comes from the curtain parda accident but in fact intentionally. 
used in traditional Hindu and Muslim humorous
households, especially in the Indian
subcontinent, to conceal women from the purse
eyes of strangers. The transferred use of this hold the purse strings have control of
expression to refer to seclusion generally
dates from the 1920s. expenditure. make a silk purse out of a sow ear: see SILK. 
1998 Times Treasury ministers are, of course,
in purdah. pushat a push if necessary; in an emergency. British
pure 1997 Trail It roomy for one person, but can
pure and simple and nothing else. take two at a push. 
1991 Alabama Game & Fish They are bred for give someone or get the push or shove
waterfowling, pure and simple. 
dismiss someone or be dismissed from a
pure as the driven snow completely pure. ob; reject someone or be rejected in a
When used of snow, driven means relationship. British informal
that it has been piled into drifts or made push at or against an open door have
smooth by the wind. The phrase wasfamously parodied by the actress Tallulah
no difficulty in accomplishing a task;
Bankhead in 1947: as pure as the driven fail to realize how easy something is. 
slush. push the boat out: see BOAT. 
the real Simon Pure: see SIMON PURE. push someone buttons: see BUTTON. 
push your luck act rashly or presumptuouslypurler on the assumption that you will
come or go a purler fall heavily, especially continue to be successful or in favour. 
head first. informalwhen push comes to shove when action
The verb purl was in dialect or colloquial must be taken; if the worst comes to the
use in the mid 19th century in the senses worst, informal
turn upside down , capsize , or go head 2001 Financia irector When push comes to
over heels. shove, investors are not always impressed
with promises of jam tomorrow. 
purple pushing
born in or to the purple born into a
reigning family or privileged class. pushing up the daisies: see DAISY. 
In ancient times, purple garments were put
worn only by royal and imperial families not know where to put yourself fee eeply
because of the rarity and costliness of the dye. 
embarrassed, informal
Born in the purple rather than to may have
1986 Robert Sproat Stunning the Punters He was
specific reference to the fact that Byzantine
empresses gave birth in a room in the palacebegging and pleading with me... with tears
at Constantinople whose walls were lined rolling down his cheeks so didn know
with the purple stone porphyry. The title the where to put myself. 
Porphyrogenitos or Porphyrogenita was put backbone into someone: see BACKBONE. 
used for a prince or princess born in this room. 
put the boot in: see BOOT. putty 232
put a brave face on something: see FACE. put words in someone mouth: see MOUTH. 
put the finger on: see FINGER. put your best foot forward: see FOOT. 
put it or yourself about be sexually put your finger on something: see FINGER. 
promiscuous. British informal put your foot down: see FOOT. 
put it to someone make a statement or put your foot in it: see FOOT. 
allegation to someone and challenge them put your hands together: see HAND. 
to deny it. 
put your hands up: see HAND. put one over on deceive someone into
accepting something false, informal put your mind to: see MIND. put the screws on: see SCREW. 
put a sock in it: see SOCK. 
puttyput something behind you get over a be like putty or wax in someone hands
bad experience by distancing yourself be easily manipulated or dominated bysomeone. from it. 
1975 Sam Selvon Moses Ascending Bob was
put two and two together: see TWO. there, and gave him a little bit of crumpet,
put up or shut up defend or justify yourself and afterwards he was like putty in my hands. 
or remain silent, informal
2003 New York Times Iraq unexpected Pyrrhic
willingness to grant access to United Nations Pyrrhic victory a victory gained at too great a
weapons inspectors presented American cost. 
intelligence with a challenge to put up orPyrrhus was a king of Epirus, whoshut up. 
defeated the Romans at Asculum in 279 BC,
put the wind up: see D. but in doing so sustained heavy losses and lost his finest troops. 
put someone wise: see WISE. Qq
nmfm queer someone pitch spoil someone  
chanc f doi n
on the q. t. secretly or secret; without anyone f 1 § something especiallySe
noticing, informal . " :. 
"0"q"ts a humorou abbre ation of quie7" ? a originated as 19th-century 
I... _.... : slang; early examples of its use suggest that
the pitch referred to is the spot where a street QUdke performer stationed themselves or the site of 
.,. .a market trader stall. 
quake in your   : see a k  
at SHAKE. 1973 Elizabeth Lemarchand Let or Hindrance
He a decent lad... he would never haveQUârt risked queering Wendy pitch with Eddy. 
get or fit a quart into a pint pot attempt
to do the impossible, especially when queSIIOn
this takes the form of trying to fit be a question of time be certain to happen
something into a space that is too small. sooner or later. 
British the sixty-four thousand dollar question: see
SIXTY-FOUR. quarter
a bad quarter of an hour: see B A D. quick
be quick off the mark: see MARK. 
queen to the quick cause someone
take the Queen shilling: see a k the distress by a hurtful remark or
King l g at SHILLING. action. 
Queensberry ! Quick means an area of flesh that is well supp ied wit ne es a f ver
the Queensberry Rules standard rules of + + V:
7- sensitive to touch or injury,polite or acceptable behaviour. : ... ... :. 
!" The Queensberr Rules are ecode of < uick a d makeshift; done or produced
rules which were drawn up in 1867 under the hastily, informal, chiefly US
supervision of Sir John Sholto Douglas quick a a flash: see F A 
1844-1900, ninth Marquis of Queensberry, .... c. ,. 
to govern the sport of boxing in Great Uick draW vei
fast a m§ 0rBritain. reacting. The draw is the action of taking a pistol or lQUeer other weapon from its holster. 
in Queer Street in difficulty, especially by
being in debt. British informal, dated. quid
;-" be quids in be in a position where you have
Queer Street was an imaginary street . fn- A , „ i;i i„ + „ ~ «<- 
u... «. u. : prohted or are likely to profit f m
where people in difficulties were supposed to : .... f
live. The phrase has been used since the early something. British informal
19th century to indicate various kinds of rOQuids ls oundin phrase"the
misfortune but its predominant use has been a ura b ±
to refer to financia ifficulty. The use of ... ... 
queer to mean a male homosexual is a t f l t l g t. Australian
separate development.. j.. 
!.. !7 : & New Zealand informal1952 Angus Wilson Hemlock and After He ;... .... 
enjoys a little flutter... and if he finds himself As an informal term for a pound sterling ;
inQueerStreetnowandagain,I msurenoone
would grudge him his bit of fun. ! Qud
or, mdatesformer times,from a sovereignthe late or gumea
17th century: its ;
quiet 234origins are unknown. Compare with not the The phrase is recorded from the late 19th
full shilling at SHILLING. century, but an earlier form, cry quits, dates
back to the mid 17th century. 
quietanything for a quiet life: see LIFE. quiver
quiet as a mouse or lamb of a person or an arrow in the quiver: see ARROW. 
animal extremely quiet or docile. 
1982 Robertson Davies The Rebel Angels shall qui vive
be as quiet as a mouse. ll just tuck my on the qui vive on the alert or lookout. 
box... in this corner, right out of your way. 
The French expression qui vive? used in
quiet as the grave: see silent as the grave at English since the late 16th century means
GRAVE. literally long live who? In former times a
sentry would issue this challenge to someone quince approaching his post so as to ascertain where !
get on someone quince irritate or their allegiance lay. 
exasperate someone. Australian informal1976 J. Weems Death Song They came in
groups of four,five,or six— all on the qui vive,
quits apprehensive of treachery, and ready to meet
call it quits agree or acknowledge that it. 
terms are now equal, especially on the
settlement of a debt. decide to abandon quote
an activity or venture, especially so as to cut quote — unquote used parenthetically
your losses. when speaking to indicate the beginning
The origin of the -  in quits is uncertain:
and end or just the beginning of a
the word may be an abbreviation of the statement or passage that you are
medieval Latin quittus, meaning repeating, especially to emphasize the
discharged , which was used on receipts to speaker detachment from or
indicate that something had been paid for. disagreement with the original, informal
Rr1998 Oldie The allotment below mine looks set
to go to rack and ruin from its previous well the three Rs reading, writing, and tended state. arithmetic, regarded as the fundamentals
off the rack: see off the peg at PEG. 
of elementary education. 
on the rack suffering intense distress orrabbit strain. 
breed like rabbits reproduce prolifically. rack your brains or brain make a
informal great effort to think of or remember
buy the rabbit fare badly; come off worse. something. 
informal A rack was a medieval instrument of
torture consisting of a frame on which a
pull or bring a rabbit out of the or a hat victim was stretched by turning rollers to
used to describe an action that is fortuitous, which their wrists and ankles were tied. 
and may involve sleight of hand or To rack someone was to torture them
deception. on this device and the image in this
work the rabbit foot on cheat or trick. US idiom is of subjecting one brains to a
similar ordeal in the effort to remember
A rabbit foot is traditionally carried as a something. good-luck charm. 
1998 Spectator If rack my brains for
something nice to say about our weather,
suppose it does at least enable us to grow
race better grass than they do in California. 
be in the race have a chance of success. 
Australian & New Zealand informal raft1953 T. A. G. Hungerford Riverslake See
a whole raft of — a large collection ofthat bloke? He pointed down the road
after the vanished car. A few years ago he something. 
wouldn have been in the race to own a Kaft here is an alteration of a dialect word car like that. raff, meaning a great quantity. a race against time a situation in which
someone attempts to do or complete 1998 Housing Agenda Since the election of
something before a particular time or Labour last May, the social inclusion agenda
before something else happens. has come to span a whole raft of Government
initiatives. rack rag
at rack and manger amid abundance or chew the rag: see chew the fat at CHEW. 
?.. n. ?. from rags to riches used to describe a
A rack is a frame in which hay is placed, person rise from a state of extreme
and a manger also holds food for horses. The poverty to one of great wealth. 
use of rack and manger together dates from 2000 Imogen Edwards-Jones My Canapé Hell
the late 14th century in both literal and Much was made of his East End roots, his
figurative senses. chance discovery on Oxford Street. He was
truly a modern day tale of rags to riches. 
go to rack and ruin gradually deteriorate in arf GLADcondition because of neglect; fall into
disrepair a your temper, informal
: 1998 New Scientist In boxing as in medieval
Rack is a variant spelling of the word theology, anger is a sin. Lose your rag and you
wrack, meaning destruction , but it is the are likely to lose the match. 
standard one in this expression, which has rf farass f a b a k f f ar
been in use since the late 16th century. : _. ,. with. 
friendship. rage 236This expression is explained in W. P. 
Drury short story The Tadpole of an
rain
Archangel 1898: When sailors desire to
it never rains but it pours misfortunes or
prove the brotherly love... with which each difficult situations tend to follow each
inspires the other, it is their... custom to keep other in rapid succession or to arrive all at
their brasswork cleaning rags in a joint the same time. 
ragbag. But should relations... become rain cats and dogs rain very hard. 
strained between them, the bag owner casts
forth upon the deck... his sometime Despite much speculation, there is no
brother rags; and with the parting of the consensus as to the origin of rain cats and
brassrags hostilities begin. The phrase dogs. Suggestions range from the
originated as late 19th-century nautical supernatural cats being associated with
slang. witches who were credited with raising
storms, dogs being attendants upon Odin,
rag, tag, and bobtail a group of people the Scandinavian storm god to the down-to- perceived as disreputable or undesirable. earth animals in medieval times drowning in
flooded streets in times of heavy rain and
A bobtail is a horse or dog with a their bodies being assumed by the credulous
docked tail, while rag and tag both express to have fallen from the skies. Other versions
the idea of tattered clothes : the phrase of the saying are rain pitchforks and, in
literally means people in ragged clothes Britain, rain stair rods, which date from the
together with their dogs and horses. The early 19th century and mid 20th century
forms tag, rag, and bobtail, ragtag and respectively, and reflect the shaft-like
bobtail, and tagrag and bobtail are also appearance of heavy rain. Rain cats and dogs 
found. is first recorded in Jonathan Swift Polite
Conversation 1738. 
a red rag to a bull: see RED. 
take the rag off the bush or hedge surpass rain on somone parade prevent
everything or everyone, chiefly US someone from enjoying an occasion
or event; spoil someone plans, informal,chiefly North American
rage come rain or shine whether it rains or not;all the rage very popular or fashionable. 
whatever the circumstances. 
R ge is used here in the sense of a 1994 BBC Top Gear Magazine But come rain or
widespread and often temporary shine, there is a torrent of new convertibles
enthusiasm or fashion. about to reach the UK. 
1998 New Scientist The weather people call this right as rain of a person perfectly fit and
repetition ensemble forecasting , and it has well, especially after a minor illness or
been all the rage since an unexpected storm accident, informal
blew in late one evening and ripped through 1995 Patrick McCabe The Dead School
southern Britain in October 1987. You just make sure to give him this
medicine and come tomorrow night he ll
be right as rain. raggedrun someone ragged exhaust someone by
making them undertake a lot of physical rainbow
activity. at the end of the rainbow used to refer to
something much sought after butrail impossible to attain. 
go off the rails begin behaving in a strange, This phrase refers to the story of a crock of !
abnormal, or wildly uncontrolled way. gold supposedly to be found by anyone who informal succeeds in reaching the end of a rainbow. 1998 New Scientist If you had... asked him
what he was doing, you might have thought chase rainbows or a rainbow pursue an
he gone off the rails. illusory goal. 
on the rails behaving or functioning in a
normal or regulated way. informal of a rain check
racehorse or jockey in a position on the take a rain check said when politely refusing
racetrack nearest the inside fence. an offer, with the implication that you may
ride the rails: see RIDE. take it up at a later date. North American
237 rap
h rain check is a ticket given to spectators a rake progress a progressive
at US sporting events enabling them to claim deterioration, especially through self a refund of their entrance money or gain indulgence. 
admission on another occasion if the event is !
cancelled because of rain. The rain-check A rake is a fashionable or wealthy man
system js mentioned as operating in US sports with dissolute or promiscuous habits. A
grounds in the late 19th century; the Rake Progress was the title of a series of
figurative use of the word dates from the engravings by William Hogarth 1697-1764. 
early 20th century. They depicted the rake life progressing
from wealthy and privileged origins to debt,
despair, and death on the gallows. 
rainy
a rainy day a possible time of need, usually thin as a rake of a person or animal very
financial need, in the future. thin. 
The expression may originate from the
days when casual farm labourers needed toram
save a proportion of their wages for a rainy ram something home: see drive something
day , i. for occasions when bad weather home at HOME. 
might prevent them from working and
earning money. rank
2002 New York Times Book Review The Russianbreak rank or ranks of soldiers or police
walked out of K. G. B. headquarters with officers fail to remain in line, fail to
insurance against a rainy day —the K. G. B. maintain solidarity. 
file on its secret mole inside the F. B. I. close ranks of soldiers or police officers
come closer together in a line, unite in
raise order to defend common interests. 
raise Cain: see CAIN. 01998 Country Life The farming community
raise the devil: see DEVIL. stands to lose those privileges unless it
closes ranks against the few who let the side
raise a dust cause turmoil, obscure the down. 
truth. Britishpull rank take unfair advantage of your
raise your eyebrows: see EYEBROW. seniority or privileged position. 
raise your hat to someone admire orrise through or from the ranks Qof a
applaud someone. private or a non-commissioned officer
j The image here is of the gesture of briefly receive a commission. advance from a
removing your hat as a mark of courtesy or lowly position in an organization by your
respect to someone. own efforts. 
raise hell: see HELL. ransom
raise the roof make or cause someone to hold someone or something to ransom
make a lot of noise inside a building, for hold someone prisoner and demand
example through cheering. payment for their release, demand
1995 Daily Mail The fans were patient and concessions from a person or organization
understanding and when Ifinallyscored by threatening damaging action. 
against Swansea they raised the roof. a king ransom: see KING. 
raise the wind obtain money for a purpose. 
British rapbeat the rap escape punishment for or be
When it first entered the language in
medieval times, this phrase referred to the
acquitted of a crime. North American informal
belief that spirits or witches were able to rap someone on or over the knuckles
cause the winds to blow in order to help or rebuke or criticize someone. 
hinder ships; the figurative use dates from
the late 18th century. take the rap be punished or blamed,
especially for something that is not your
fault or for which others are equally
rake responsible. 
rake over old coals or rake over the ashes
revive the memory of a past event which is The late 18th-century use of rap to mean criticism or rebuke was extended in earlybest forgotten, chiefly Britishraspberry 238
20th-century American English to include a with their radiant personalities and shining
criminal charge and a prison sentence , answers. 
Compare with take the fall at FALLrazor
raspberry Occam razor: see OCCAM. 
blow a raspberry make a derisive or on a razor edge: see on a knife-edge at
contemptuous sound with your lips. KNIFE-EDGE. 

This expression is from rhyming slang, read
where raspberry tart means a fart. read between the lines look for or discover a
1996 Observer It is unthinkable that, this close meaning that is hidden or implied rather
to a general election, the party is going to blow than explicitly stated. 
a raspberry at its leader. 1994 American Spectator Those familiar with
the virulent animosity in this element of black
rat racism can read between the lines to get a
rats deserting a sinking ship people fuller picture. 
hurrying to get away from an enterprise or read someone like a book be able to
organization that is failing, informal understand someone thoughts and
motives clearly or easily. 
ration read my lips listen carefully used to
come up or be given with the rations of a emphasize the importance of the speaker  
medal be awarded automatically and words or the earnestness of their intent. 
without regard to merit, military slang North American informal
rattle expression was most famously used
rattle someone cage make someone feel by the US Republican president George Bush in an election campaign pledge in 1988:
angry or annoyed, usually deliberately. Read my lips: no new taxes. informal
A humorous comparison is implied
read the riot act give someone a strong
between the person annoyed in this way and warning that they must improve their
a dangerous animal taunted by spectators behaviour. 
outside its cage. The Riot Act was passed by the British
rattle sabres threaten to take aggressive government in 1715 in the wake of the
acobite rebellion of that year and was
action. designed to prevent civi isorder. The Actmade it a felony for a group of twelve or
raw more people to refuse to disperse after being come the raw prawn attempt to deceive ordered to do so and having being read a
someone. Australian informal certain part of the Act by a person in
authority. It was not repealed until 1967. 
In Australian English, a stupid person can be referred to as a prawn. take something as read assume some thing without the need for further
1959 Eric Lambert Glory Thrown In Don ever
come the raw prawn with Doc, mate. He discussion. 
knows all the lurks. you wouldn read about it used to express
in the raw in its true state; not made to incredulity, disgust, or ruefulness. Australian
seem better or more palatable than it & New Zealand informal
actually is. of a person naked, informal
touch someone on the raw upset someoneready
by referring to a subject about which they ready for the off of a person or vehicle fully
are extremely sensitive. prepared to leave, informal
ready to roll of a person or machine
ray fully prepared to start functioning or
ray of sunshine someone or something that moving, informal
brings happiness into the lives of others. 
1997 Trai on worry... let our Knowledge real
experts bring a ray of sunshine into your lives for real used to assert that something is
239 record
genuine or is actually the case. North American rebelinformal
a rebel without a cause a person who is1992 Michael Bishop Count Geiger Blues
The man... radiated only bluster and deeply dissatisfied with society in general
uncertainty. If challenged, he run. The but does not have a specific aim to fight
other man facing Xavier was for real. for. He fight. 
Rebel Without A Cause was the title of a get real! used to convey that an idea or US film starring James Dean, released in 1955. statement is foolish or overly idealistic. 
informal, chiefly North American
1995 Jayne Miller Voxpop You might think rebound
living in a garret and starving for your art is on the rebound while still affected by the
wonderful, but get real! emotiona istress caused by the ending of
the real McCoy: see MCCOY. a romantic or sexual relationship. 
the real Simon Pure: see SIMON PURE. 
the real thing a thing that is absolutelyreceiving
be at or on the receiving end be subjected
genuine or authentic, informal to something unpleasant, informal
ream rechargeream someone ass or butt criticize or
recharge your batteries regain your strength
rebuke someone. North American vulgar slang
and energy by resting and relaxing for a
reap time. reap the harvest or fruits of suffer the
reckonedresults or consequences of. 
a — to be reckoned with or to reckon with
you reap what you sow you eventually have a thing or person of considerable
to face up to the consequences of your importance or ability that is not to be
actions. ignored or underestimated. 
This proverbial saying exists in various 2002 New Internationalist Now nearly 80, the
forms. Its biblical source is Galatians 6:7: Be ex-Harvard Pro is still full of brio and a force to
not deceived; God is not mocked: for be reckoned with. 
whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also ireap. record
for the record so that the true facts are
recorded or known. rear 1992 Sun There was no need to ask if had
rear its head of an unpleasant matter gone to the flat. For the record have never
emerge; present itself. been to the flat. The questions were calculated
to make me look bad. reason
for reasons best known to himself or a matter of record something that is estab herself, etc. used when recounting lished as a fact through being officially
someone behaviour to suggest that it is recorded. 
puzzling or perverse, chiefly humorous off the record not made as an official or
attributable statement. 
see reason or sense realize that you have 1990 Charles Allen The Savage Wars of Peace been wrong and adopt a sensible attitude. went to see him very much as somebody going
it stands to reason it is obvious or logical. in just to have a chat with him off the record
theirs or ours not to reason why it is not after the interrogation. 
someone place to question a situation, on the record used in reference to the
order, or system. making of an official or public statement.
officially measured and noted. This phrase comes from Tennyson poem The Charge of the Light Brigade 1854, recorded on tape and reproduced on a
which describes how, in a notorious incident record or another sound medium. 
in the Crimean War, the British cavalry put or set the record straight give the true
unquestioningly obeyed a suicidal order to version of events that have been reported
ride straight at the Russian guns. incorrectly; correct a misapprehension. 
red 240red red-light
better dead than red the prospect of nuclear red-light district an area of a city or town
war is preferable to that of a Communist containing many brothels, strip clubs, and
society. other sex businesses. 
This expression was a cold-war slogan; it redresswas reversed by the nuclear disarmament
campaigners of the late 1950s as better red redress the balance take action to restore
than dead. equality in a situation. 
in the red in debt, overdrawn, or losing reduced
money. in reduced circumstances used euphem-istically to refer to the state of being poor
Red ink was traditionally used to indicate jafter being relatively wealthy. 
debit items and balances in accounts. Compare with in the black at BLACK. reed
paint the red: see A T. a broken reed a weak or ineffectual person,
red as a beetroot of a person red-faced, especially one on whose support it is
foolish to rely. typically through embarrassment. 
a red herring something, especially a clue, This expression refers to Isaiah 36:6, in
which is or is intended to be misleading or which the Assyrian general taunts King
Hezekiah of Jerusalem about the latter  
distracting. supposed ally, the Egyptian pharaoh: Lo,
This expression derives from the former thou trusteth in the staff of this broken reed, practice of using the pungent scent of a dried on Egypt. 
smoked herring to teach hounds to follow a trail smoked herrings were red in colour as a : result of the curing process. reina free rein complete freedom of action or
red in tooth and claw involving savage or expression. 
merciless conflict or competition. 
The image here is of loosening grip on the This phrase originated as a quotation reins of a horse, allowing it to choose its own !
from Tennyson In Memoriam 1850: course and pace, in contrast to the greater
Nature, red in tooth and claw. control implied by the next idiom. 

1998 Spectator Life is sharper on the shop keep a tight rein on exercise strict control
floor, too; and for small business it is red in
tooth and claw. over; allow little freedom to. 
a red letter day a pleasantly memorable, reinvent
fortunate, or happy day. 
reinvent the wheel waste a great deal of time
In Church calendars, a saint day or or effort in creating something that already
church festival was traditionally exists or doing something that has
distinguished by being written in red letters, already been done. 
like a red rag to a bull an object, relieve
utterance, or act which is certain to
relieve your feelings use strong language or
provoke or anger someone. 
vigorous behaviour when annoyed. Thecolourredwastraditionallysupposed to provoke a bull, and is the colour of the religion
cape used by matadors in bullfighting. get religion be converted to religious belief
and practices, informal
1998 Times Such talk is like a red rag to a bull at
the Soil Association. remainreds under the bed used during the cold war
it remains to be seen something is not yetwith reference to the feared presence and
known or certain. 
influence of Communist sympathizers in a 1996 Scientific American It remains to be seen
society. how well Russian and U. S. spacefarers will
see red become very angry suddenly, informal work together... in the more demanding
241 rid
environment of a space station under cold vengeance is often more satisfying if it
construction. is not exacted immediately, proverb
residence reverse
— in residence a person with a specified the reverse of the medal: see MEDAL. 
occupation especially an artist or writer
paid to work for a time in a college or other
institution. reward
2002 Ashmolean Annual Report Artist in go to your reward die. 
Residence, Sarah Mulhall, demonstrates print- This euphemisistic expression is based on making techniques. the idea that people receive their just deserts after death. resistancethe line or path of least resistance an
option which avoids difficulty or rewrite
unpleasantness; the easiest course of rewrite history select or interpret events
action. from the past in a way that suits your own
particular purposes. 
resort rewrite the record books of a sports player
in the last resort whatever else happens or is break a record or several records. 
the case; ultimately. 
1991 John Caldwell Oxford History of English rhyme
Music In the last resort it was only Italian rhyme or reason logical explanation or
singers who could command the attention of reason. 
the public in a large theatre. respect ribbon
cut a or the ribbon perform an opening
pay your respects: see PAY. 
ceremony, usually by formally cutting a
ribbon strung across the entrance to a
respecter building, road, etc. 
be no respecter of persons treat everyonecut ortear something to ribbons cut or
the same, without being influenced bytear something so badly that only ragged
their status or wealth. 
strips remain. damage something
This expression refers to Acts 10:34: God severely. 
is no respecter of persons. rich
a bit rich used to refer to something that
rest causes ironic amusement or indignation. 
give it a rest used to ask someone to stop 1998 Times It is also a bit rich for Mr Hames to
doing or talking about something that the reprove Buckingham Palace for its new, slick,
speaker finds irritating or tedious, informal emphasis on presentation , while speaking for
no rest for the wicked: see no peace for the the organisation that invented rebranding
wicked at WICKED. Britain. 
rest your case conclude your presentation
of evidence and arguments in a lawsuit. Richard
0 used humorously to show that you have had the Richard be irreparably
believe you have presented sufficient damaged. Australian
evidence for your views. This expression comes from rhyming slang the rest is history: see HISTORY. Richard the Third, meaning bird. In the
theatre, get the bird means be booed andrest on your laurels: see LAURELS. hissed at. retreat
beat a retreat: see BEAT. rid
be well rid of be in a better state for having
revenge removed or disposed of a troublesome or
revenge is a dish best served or eaten unwanted person or thing. 
riddance 242
riddance someone or something rides again used toindicate that someone or something has
good riddance said to express relief at
reappeared unexpectedly and with new
having got free of a troublesome orvigour. 
unwanted person or thing. 
ride shotgun travel as a guard in the seat
Sometimes a fuller form is used: good next to the driver of a vehicle. ride in the
riddance to bad rubbish!
passenger seat of a vehicle. act as a
protector, chiefly North American
riddle a rough or easy ride a difficult or easy time
talk or speak in riddles express yourself in doing something. 
an ambiguous or puzzling manner. take someone for a ride deceive or cheat
someone, informal
ride
for the ride for pleasure or interest, rather rig
than any serious purpose. in full rig wearing smart or ceremonial
2002 New York Times Women are now the clothes, informal
primary force behind an explosion in newcocktail concoctions, and men are simply right
going along for the ride, say bartenders and bang to rights of a criminal with positive
liquor marketing executives. proof of guilt, informal
let something ride take no immediate action
A North American variant of this
over something. expression is dead to rights. 
ride bodkin: see BODKIN. 1993 G. F. Newman Law & Order He hadn got
ride for a fall act in a reckless or arrogant way the most vital piece of information he needed
that invites defeat or failure, informal in order to capture the blaggers bang to rights. 
This phrase originated as a late 19th- put or set someone right restore
century horse-riding expression, meaning to someone to health. make someone
ride a horse, especially in the hunting field, in understand the true facts of a situation. 
such a way as to make an accident likely. right as a trivet: see TRIVET. 
ride herd on keep watch over. right enough certainly; undeniably, informal
a right one a silly or foolish person. British
Literally, this North American expression jinformal
means guard or control a herd of cattle by
riding round its edge. 1988 Salman Rushdie The Satanic Verses Quite
soon they burst out into uproarious guffaws,
1999 Coloradoan Fort Collins That, in turn, we ve got a right one here and no mistake. 
would detract from his ability to ride herd on
Washington special interests, allowing she or she ll be right that will be all right;
deficits to grow like mushrooms under a don worry. Australian informal
rotten log. 
somewhere to the right of Genghis Khan
ride high be successful. holding right-wing views of the most
ride off into the sunset achieve a happy extreme kind. 
conclusion to something. Genghis Khan 1162-1227, the founder of the Mongol empire, is used here as aO closing scenes of westerns, the
supreme example of a repressive and
characters are often seen riding off into the
tyrannical ruler. The name of the early 5th sunset after everything has been resolvedcentury warlord Attila the Hun is sometimes 
satisfactorily. 
substituted for that of Ghengis Khan in thisexpression. 
ride on someone coat-tails: see COAT-TAIL. 
ride the pine or bench of an athlete
not participate in a game or event, Riley
typically because of poor form. North the life of Riley or Reilly a luxurious or
American informal carefree existence, informal
ride the rails travel by rail, especially without Reilly or Riley is a common Irish surname, A popular song of the early 20th century
a ticket. North American entitled My Name is Kelly included the lines ride roughshod over: see ROUGHSHOD. 243 Ritz
Faith and my name is Kelly Michael Kelly, But j let something rip allow something,
m living the life of Reilly just the same. This ! especially a vehicle, to go at full
may be the source of the expression but it isspeed. allow something to happen
possible that the songwriter, Pease, was
drawing on an already existing catchphrase. forcefully or without interference. 
express something forcefully and noisily. 
1978 Daily Telegraph It is simply not true that informal
we don pay tax and are living the life of Riley. 
riseRimmon get or take a rise out of provoke an
bow down in the house of Rimmon: see BOW. angry or irritated response from
someone, especially by teasing them. rinderpest informal
before or since the rinderpest a long time rise and shine get out of bed smartly; wake
ago or for a very long time. South African up. informal
Rinderpest is a contagious vira disease of rise from the ashes be renewed after
cattle that periodically caused heavy losses in ; destruction. 
much of Africa. The 1896 epidemic was so
devastating that it was treated as a historical In classical mythology, the phoenix was a
landmark, so giving rise to this expression. unique bird resembling an eagle that lived
for five or six centuries in the Arabian desert,After this time it burned itself on a funeral
ring pyre ignited by the sun and fanned by its own hold the ring monitor a dispute or conflict wings and was then born again from the
ashes with renewed youth to live throughwithout becoming involved in it. 
another cycle of life. The simile like a phoenix 
1991 Mark Tully No Full Stops in India The police from the ashes is used of someone or
no longer attempt to hold the ring between something that has made a fresh start after
the farmers and landless labourers fighting for apparently experiencing tota estruction. 
ust the paltry minimum wage. 
ring a bell: see BELL. rise to the bait react to a provocation or
ring the changes: see CHANGE. temptation exactly as intended. 
ring down or up the curtain mark the end The image here is of a fish coming to the or the beginning of an enterprise or event. surface to take a bait or fly. 
The reference here is to the ringing of a 1966 Listener should perhaps apologise for
bell in a theatre as the signal to raise or lower having risen to the bait of Mr Wilkinson  
the stage curtain atthe beginning or end of a provocative letter. 
perfomance. Compare with bring down the rise with the sun or lark get up early in the
curtain on at CURTAIN. morning. 
ring in your ears or head linger in the
memory. risingsomeone star is rising: see STAR. 
ring the knell of: see KNELL. ring off the hook of a telephone be rite
constantly ringing due to a large number of rite of passage a ceremony or event marking
incoming calls. North American an important stage in someone life,
run or make rings round someone especially birth, initiation, marriage, and
outclass or outwit someone very easily. death. 
informalthrow your hat in the ring: see HAT. Ritz
put on the Ritz make a show of luxury or
riot extravagance. 
read the riot act: see READ. The hotels in Paris, London, and New York
founded by the Swiss-born hotelier César Ritz rip 1850-1918 became synonymous with great
let rip do something or proceed vigorously luxury. This expression dates from the heyday
or without restraint. express yourself of these grand hotels in the early 20th
century. 
vehemently or angrily, informal
river 244phrase include unclothe Peter and clothe
river Paul and borrow from Peter to pay Paul. 
sell someone down the river betray
someone, especially so as to benefit 1997 New Scientist So far, NASA has been able
yourself, informal to rob Peter to pay Paul, taking money from
the shuttle and science programmes to keep
This expression originated in the USA, the ISS on track. 
with reference to the practice in the slave rob someone blind get a lot of money from
owning states of selling troublesome slavesto owners of sugar-cane plantations on the
someone by deception or extortion, informal
lower Mississippi, where conditions were harsher than those in the more northerly Robin Hood
states. round Robin Hood barn by a circuitous
route. 
1998 Bookseller Once you have lost it with the
first three the last lot will sell you down the Robin Hood isthe semi-legendary English river so fast it isn true. medieval outlaw reputed to have robbed the up the river to or prison, informal, chiefly North rich and helped the poor. In this expression,
American Robin Hood barn represents an out-of-the way place of a kind that might be used by an ;
This phrase originated with reference to outlaw or fugitive such as Robin Hood,
Sing Sing prison, which is situated up the Recorded from the mid 19th century, the
Hudson River from the city of New York. phrase seemsto have originated in the dialect
speech of the English Midlands, the area in
which Robin Hood is said to have operated,road
all roads lead to Rome: see 
rock
d the road the future, informalbetween a rock and a hard place in a
the end of the road: see D. situation where you are faced with two
hit the road: see T. equally difficult or unpleasant alternatives. 
in or out of the or your road or out ofinformal
1998 Times They are saying now, as they once
someone way. informal said of Richard Nixon, that Bill Clinton is
one for the road a fina rink, especially an between a rock and a hard place. 
alcoholic one, before leaving for home. get your rocks off have an orgasm. 
informalobtain pleasure or satisfaction, vulgar slang
a road to nowhere a situation or course of
ontherocksQofarelationshiporenterprise
action offering no prospects of progress or
experiencing difficulties and likely to fail. advancement.
of a drink served undiluted and with ice
take to the road or take the road set out on cubes, informal
a journey or series of journeys. rock the boat: see BOAT. roaring rocker
do a roaring trade or business sell large
off your rocker crazy, informal
amounts of something; do very good
business, informal A rocker in this expression is a concave
piece of wood or metal placed under a chair rob or cradle enabling it to rock back and forth. 
rob Peter to pay Paul take something away 1932 Evelyn Waugh Black Mischief It going to
from one person to pay another, leaving be awkward for us if the Emperor goes off his
the former at a disadvantage; discharge one rocker. debt only to incur another. rocket
This expression probably arose in
reference to the saints and apostles Peter and not rocket science used to indicate that
Paul, who are often shown together as equals something is not very difficult to
in Christian art and who therefore may be understand, humorous
presumed to be equally deserving of honour rise like a rocket and fall like a stick rise
and devotion. It is uncertain whether a suddenly and dramatically and
specific allusion is intended; variants of the
subsequently fall in a similar manner. 
245 rolling
The origin of this phrase is a jibe made by ; 1998 Oldie Western economists cottoned on to
Thomas Paine about Edmund Burke oratory basic flaws in the Indonesian economy
in a 1792 House of Commons debate on the which they hadn noticed or didn want to
subject of the French Revolution. Paine notice while it was on a roll. 
remarked: As he rose like a rocket, he fell like a roll in the hay or the sack an act of sexual
the stick. intercourse, informal
1998 Barbara Kingsolver The Poisonwood Bible
rocky He just treats me like his slave-girlfriend housemaid, having a roll in the hay
the rocky road to — a difficult progression to
when he feels like it and then running
something. off doing God knows what for months at a
2001 Star So far Al haven put a foot wrong time. on the rocky road to superstardom. 
a roll Jack Rice couldn jump over a large
rod quantity of money. Australian informal
kiss the rod: see KISS. roll of honour a list of those who have died
make a rod for your own back do something in battle, a list of people whose deeds or
likely to cause difficulties for yourself later. achievements, typically in sport, are
honoured. a rod in pickle a punishment in store. 
roll up your sleeves prepare to fight or work. 
In pickle means preserved ready for
roll with the punches Qof a boxer move
future use. This form, which dates from the
mid 17th century, has superseded an earlier
their body away from an opponent  
mid 16th-century variant a rod in piss. blows so as to lessen the impact,
adapt yourself to difficult or adverse
rule someone or something with a rod of circumstances. 
iron control or govern someone or some- strike someone off the rolls or rol ebar a
thing very strictly or harshly. solicitor from practising after dishonesty
This expression comes from Psalm 2:9:
or other misconduct. 
Thou shaltbreakthem with a rod of iron; thou The rolls here are the official lists or
shalt dash them in pieces ike a potter vessel , records, so called from the time when such
records were kept on parchment or paper
spare the rod and spoil the child if children scrolls. are not physically punished when they do
wrong their persona evelopment willsuffer, proverb rolled
all rolled into one of characteristics drawn
Roland from different people or things combined
a Roland for an Oliver an effective or in one person or thing. 
appropriate retort or response; tit for tat. 1907 George Bernard Shaw Major Barbara My
archaic
methods... would be no use if were Voltaire,
Rousseau, Bentham, Mill, Dickens, Carlyle,
The phrase alludes to the evenly matched Ruskin, George, Butler, and Morris all rolled
single combat between Roland, the legendary into one. 
nephew of Charlemagne, and Oliver, another
of Charlemagne knights paladins. Neither rolling
man was victorious and a strong friendship
be rolling in it or in money be very rich. 
subsequently developed between them,
According to the French medieval epic the informalChanson de Roland, Roland was in command
Rolling in i. turning over and over in of the rearguard of Charlemagne army
here has the sense of luxuriating in. The idea when it was ambushed at Roncesvalles now
of wallowing in riches has been current since Roncevaux in the Pyrenees in 778; despite
the late 16th century. the urging of Oliver that he should blow his
horn to summon aid, Roland refused to do so
until too late, and they were slain along with
have people rolling in the aisles: see AISLE. 
the rest of the rearguard. a rolling stone a person who does not settle
in one place for long. roll This expression comes from the proverb a on a roll experiencing a prolonged spell of rolling stone gathers no moss, meaning that a ! person who is always moving on will not
success or good luck, informal
Roman 246accumulate wealth or status, or responsi-bilities or commitments. 
roofgo through or hit the roof Qof prices or
rolling drunk so drunk as to be swaying or figures reach extreme or unexpected
staggering. heights; become exorbitant, suddenlybecome very angry, informal
Roman raise the roof: see RAISE. 
a Roman holiday an occasion on the roof falls in a disaster occurs; everything
which enjoyment or profit is derived goes wrong. 
from the suffering or discomfort of
others. rooftop
This expression comes from the poet shout something from the rooftops talk
Byron description of the dying gladiator in about something openly and jubilantly,
Childe Harold Pilgrimage as having been especially something previously kept
butchered to make a Roman holiday. secret. 
Th phrase is adapted from Luke 12:3:
Rome that which ye have spoken in the ear in
all roads lead to Rome there are many closets shall be proclaimed upon the !
housetops. different ways of reaching the same goal orconclusion. 
This is an ancient saying which was based room
on the fact that Rome was the point of in a smoke-filled room of political
convergence of all the main roads of the bargaining or decision-making conducted
Roman empire, and after that of the privately by a small group of influential
medieval pilgrimage routes through Europe. 
It can be compared with the medieval Latin
people rather than more openly or
phrase mille vie ducunt hominem per secula democratically. 
Romam, meaning a thousand roads lead a This expression comes from a 1920 news
man forever towards Rome. report about the selection of the Republican presidential candidate: Warren Harding of Rome was not built in a day a complex or Ohio was chosen by a group of men in a
ambitious task is bound to take a long time smoke-filled room. 
and should not be rushed. 
no or not room to swing a cat used in
j This warning against rashness and reference to a very confined space. 
j impatience has been current in English since humorous
j the mid 16th century. 
The cat in this expression is probably a
when in Rome do as the Romans do when cat-o -nine-tails , a form of whip with nine
abroad or in an unfamiliar environment knotted cords. In former times these
you should adopt the customs or behaviour whips were used to flog wrongdoers,
of those around you. especially at sea. 

This proverbial expression may ultimately room at the top opportunity to join an elite
derive from St Ambrose of Milan d. 397, or the top ranks of a profession. 
who is quoted in one of St Augustine letters
as saying that when he was in Rome he fasted The expression is attributed to the
as they did there, on a Saturday, although American politician Daniel Webster
when he was in Milan he did not do this. A 1782-1852, who was cautioned against
medieval Latin saying expresses the idea as si attempting to enter the overcrowded legal
fueris Romae, Romano vivito more; si fueris profession and is said to have replied: There !
alibi, vivito sicut ibi, if you are at Rome, livein is always room at the top. 
the Roman manner; if elsewhere, live as they
do there. root
1998 Pat Chapman 1999 Good Curry Guide put down roots begin to lead a settled life in
Cutlery is still for wimps though you no a particular place. 
longer have to ask for it. But when in Rome,
eat the correct way, please, using a piece of root and branch used to express the
Roti to scoop up your curry, in your right thorough or radical nature of a process or
hand only. operation. 247 rough
1999 Which? Last year, the government This expression is taken from the first line undertook a root and branch examination of of Robert Browning poem The Patriot 
the home-buying process in England and 1855, where it describes the throwing of
Wales. roses at a popular hero as he passed through strike at the root or roots of have a the streets. 
potentially destructive effect on. 1977 World of Cricket Monthly Although
take root become fixed or established. Australia lost the Ashes, it was roses, roses,
all the way for him. 
rope smell the roses: see SMELL. 
give someone enough rope or plenty of under the rose in confidence; under pledge
rope give a person enough freedom of of secrecy, archaic
action to bring about their own downfall. 
The origin of the rose as an emblem of
The fuller form of this expression is the secrecy is uncertain; the concept may have
proverb give a man enough rope and he will originated in Germany and there was a
hang himself, which has been in use in similar expression in early modern Dutch,
various forms since the mid 17th century. Under the rosse appears in a 1546 State Paper of Henry VIII, with a gloss that suggests that know the ropes: see KNOW. it was then a new or unfamiliar expression. 
money for old rope: see money for jam at The Latin equivalent sub rosa has also been
very commonly used in English since the mid ;
MONEY. 17th century in this metaphorical sense. on the ropes in a desperate position; in a
state of near collapse or defeat. 
rotThis is an idiom from boxing, alluding to ;
the rot sets in a rapid succession of usually
the situation of a losing boxer who is forced back by his opponent against the ropes that unaccountable failures begins. 
mark the sides of the boxing ring. First
recorded, in its literal sense, in the early 19through
century, the phrase has been in figurative use bit of rough a usually male sexual partner
since at least the 1920s. whose toughness or lack of sophistication
is a source of attraction, informal
a rope of sand used in allusion to something 1998 Spectator The programme dwelt at
that provides only illusory security or length on the maestro interest in
coherence, literary extramarital sex, particularly with below stairs women—what would be called theserose days a bit of rough. 
bed of roses: see BED. rough and ready Qrough or crude but
effective, of a person or placecome up roses of a situation develop in a
unsophisticated or unrefined. 
very favourable way. informal
rough around the edges having a fewcome up smelling of roses: see SMELLING. 
imperfections. 
everything or it all roses everything is
going well, informal rough as bags lacking refinement; coarse. 
there is no rose without a thorn every Australian & New Zealand informal
apparently desirable situation has its share a rough diamond a person who has
of trouble or difficulty. genuinely fine qualities but uncouth
manners, informal
This expression has been proverbial since !
the mid 15th century. The earliest recorded Literally, a rough diamond is a diamond
instance is in a work by John Lydgate before it has been cut and polished. A North 1430-40: There is no rose... in garden, but American variant of this expression is a
there be sum thorne. diamond in the rough. 
not all roses not entirely perfect or the rough edge or side of your tongue a
agreeable, informal scolding. 
1938 Graham Greene Brighton Rock Some- rough edges slight imperfections in
times he bad to me... it not all roses. someone or something that is basically
roses, roses, all the way very successful or satisfactory. 
pleasant. rough justice treatment, especiallyroughshod 248
punishment, that is approximately fair. rub your hands show keen satisfaction or
treatment that is not at all fair or not in expectation. 
accordance with the law. rub someone nose in something or rub
a rough passage or ride a difficult time or it in emphatically or repeatedly draw
experience. someone attention to an embarrassing orpainful fact, informal
sleep rough sleep in uncomfortable
This expression comes from the mistaken conditions, usually out of doors. British belief that the way to house-train a puppy or take the rough with the smooth accept the kitten is to rub their noses in their faeces or
difficult or unpleasant aspects of life as well urine if they have made a mess indoors. 
as the good. 1963 P. M. Hubbard Hush as May sorry. v
roughshod said sorry... Don rub my nose in it. 
ride roughshod over carry out your own rub shoulders associate or come into contact
plans or wishes with arrogant disregard for with another person. 
others. A
1977 Times Literary Supplement Sociologists are ; US variant of this expression is rub
notorious for their use of generalizing terms elbows. 
thatrideroughshod over the particularities of 1943 Graham Greene The Ministry of Fear It
history. wasn exactly a criminal world, though
eddying along its dim and muted corridors you
round might possibly rub shoulders with genteel
go the round or rounds of a story or joke forgers. 
be passed on from person to person. rub someone up the wrong way irritate or
in the round of sculpture standing free repel someone. 
with all sides shown, rather than carved in
The image here is of stroking an animal
relief against a ground, treated fully and against the lie of its fur. 
thoroughly; with all aspects shown or
considered. of a theatrical performance there or here the rub that is the crucial
with the audience placed on at least three difficulty or problem, literary
sides of the stage. 
This expression comes from Shakespeare ;
round the bend: see BEND. Hamlet To sleep: perchance to dream: ay,
a square peg in a round hole: see PEG. there stherub;Forinthatsleepofdeathwhat :
dreams may come When we have shuffled off
row this mortal coil, Must give us pause. In the
game of bowls, a rub is an impediment that
a hard or tough row to hoe a difficult task. 
prevents a bowl from running smoothly. 
Hoeing a row of plants is used here as a
metaphor for very arduous work. 
1998 Times Even worse, and here is the rub,
nobody could say who put what paper inwhich tier of whose red box. royal rubber
royal road to a way of attaining or reaching
something without trouble. burn rubber drive very quickly, informal
1998 Times Monsanto is burning rubber on a
This expression alludes to a remark racetrack to become world leader in life
attributed to the Greek mathematician Euclid sciences. 
c. 300 BC. When the Egyptian ruler Ptolemy ;
asked whether geometry could not be made Rubicon
easier, Euclid is said to have replied: There is cross the Rubicon take an irrevocable step. 
no royal road to geometry. The Rubicon was a small river in north east Italy which in the first century BC marked
rub the boundary of Italy proper with the
not have two — to rub together have none province of Cisalpine Gaul. By taking his army or hardly any of the specified items, across the Rubicon into Italy in 49 BC, Julius
especially coins, informal Caesar broke the law forbidding a general to ;
1999 Independent Soon you realise you have as lead an army out of his own province, and so
committed himself to war against the
many troubles when you arerichas when youSenate and Pompey. 
haven two pennies to rub together. 
249 run
ruffle give someone or something a good run for
their money provide someone or some ruffle someone feathers cause someone to
thing with challenging competition or
become annoyed or upset. opposition. 
1997 Rugby World Beaten Welsh Cup finalists
ruffled Swansea gave them a good run for their
smooth someone ruffled feathers make money for much of the campaign before
someone less angry or irritated by using fading away. 
soothing words. run to seed: see go to seed at SEED. 
rug have a good run for your money derive
reward or enjoyment in return for your
cut a rug: see CUT. outlay or efforts. 
pull the rug from under someone abruptly
withdraw support from someone. try to run before you can walk attempt
something difficult before you have
grasped the basic skills required. 
rule
rule of thumb a broadly accurate guide or run someone close almost defeat a person or
principle, based on experience or practice team in a contest. 
rather than theory. run dry especially of a source of money or
1998 New Scientist The best forecast of information be completely used up. 
tomorrow weather in any one place often
comes not from a supercomputer, but from make a run for it attempt to escape
the rule of thumb that says: tomorrow it will someone or something by running away. 
be similar to today. run foul of come into conflict with; go
— rules, OK? used to express your against. 
enthusiasm for a particular person or : This expression is nautical in origin: when thing, informal, humorous used of a ship it means collide or become
2000 Elle Here at ELLE we ve always been entangled with an obstacle or another
big fans of Kerrigan urban babewear, vessel. Both literal and figurative uses were
and this season... she really rocked. current by the late 17th century. 
Daryl K rules, OK?
rule the roost be in complete control. run the gauntlet: see GAUNTLET. 
run high be strong or tumultuous. 
The original expression was rule the roast, 
which was common from the mid 16th The image here is of waves or tides rising century onwards. Although none of the early ! above their normal height, especially in
examples of its use shed any light on its stormy conditions. 
source, we can surmise that it originally
referred to someone being the most 1993 Wall Street Journal Europe Everybody
important person at a banquet or feast. Rule knows it is an exercise, but emotions
the roost, found from the mid 18th century, nevertheless run high as the Army
has now replaced the earlier version. augmentées warm to their roles. 
run into the sand come to nothing. 
run the rule over examine cursorily for
1994 Sunday Times The Ulster Unionists... are
correctness or adequacy. British
angry because they gave reluctant support to
1998 Spectator A committee of directors wil ecember initiative and it now seems to be
run the rule over would-be bidders. running into the sand. 
run a mile: see MILE. rumour
rumour has it it is rumoured. run off at the mouth talk excessively or
1993 Margaret Atwood The Robber Bride It a indiscreetly. North American informal
good thing Roz didn invest in that one, run of the mill the ordinary or undistin rumour has it that the backers are losing a guished type. shirt or two. 
In this expression, the run is literally the
run material produced from a mill before it has
been sorted or inspected for quality. be run off your feet be kept extremely busy. 
informal run someone out of town force someone to
run it fine: see cut it fine at FINE. leave a place, chiefly North American
runaround 250run rings round: see RING. make the running set the pace in a race or
run someone or something to earth or activity. 
ground find someone or something, a running battle a confrontation that has
usually after a long search. gone on for a long time. 
This is an idiom from hunting, especially Literally, a running battle is one that is
foxhunting, its literal meaning being constantly changing its location, the opposite chase a hunted animal to its lair and corner it of a pitched battle see PITCHED. The
there. expression running fight was used in the late
17th century to describe a naval engagement
run with the hare and hunt with the in which the fight was continued as one party
hounds: see HARE. : retreated or fled. Running battle appears to have originated in the mid 20th century. 
run yourself into the ground: see work
yourself into the ground at GROUND. take a running jump used when angrily
rejecting or disagreeing with someone. 
runaround 1998 Oldie Get back to the studio and tell the
give someone the runaround deceive and focus groups to take a running jump!
confuse someone; avoid answering take up the running take over as pacemaker
someone questions directly, informal in a race. rune rush
read the runes try to forecast the outcome
of a situation by analysing all the give someone the bum rush: see BUM. 
significant factors involved. British rush your fences act with undue haste. British
The runes were an ancient Germanic This is a metaphor from horse riding: in
alphabet once used in northern Europe, each ; the hunting field if you rush your fences,
character of which was supposed to have a rather than tackling the obstacles steadily,
secret magical significance. Small stones and you risk a fall. 
pieces of bone engraved with these
characters were used to try to foretell the a rush of blood to the head a sudden attack
future. of wild irrationality in your thinking oractions. runner rut
do a runner leave hastily, especially to avoid in a rut following a fixed especially tedious
paying for something or to escape from or dreary pattern of behaviour that is
somewhere. British informa ifficult to change. 
1997 lain Sinclair Lights Out For The Territory
Nobody seemed to know if the absentee The rutin this expression is the deep
landlord had done a runner. ! groove worn by a wheel travelling many
times along the same track. 
running 1995 Nick Hornby High Fidelity should have
in or out of the running in or no longer in spotted that we were in a rut, that had
contention for an award, victory, or a place allowed things to fester to such an extent that
in a team. she was on the lookout for someone else. Ss
Sabbath people makes you feel more confident orsecure about takin
a sabbath day journey a short and easy § a - Proverb
journey. saj
Rabbinical law allowed a Jew to travel a sail close to or near the sail as
certain distance on the Sabbath about a nearly against the wind as possible. 
kilometre; in the Bible, Mount Olivet is come close to breaking a rule or the law;
described as being from Jerusalem a sabbath behave or operate in a risky way. 
day journey Acts 1:12. = ..,
take the out of sails: seeWIND. sack
hit the sack go to bed. informal Salad
hold the sack bear an unwelcome Vour a a daVs the period when you are
responsibility. North American g a inexperienced. the peak or
... ... .... heyday of something. 
a roll in the sack: see a roll in the hay at ROLL. r. 
Tn is a quotation from Shakespeare  
sackcloth Anthony and Cleopatra. Cleopatra is
in sackcloth and ashes manifesting grief or commenting on her previous relationship
renentance with J u a a : salad days, When was :
green in judgement, cold in blood To say as In the Bible, the wearing of sackcloth and saidthen! 
the sprinkling ashes on your head were signs of penitence or mourning. calnnn
1999 Athletics Weekly It was theirfirstfocal in the last chance saloon: see LAST. 
point, the moment of truth when their season
could blossom further in Seville or end in Salt
sackcloth and ashes. a a j b a g f British dated
like a c
«arr-Aff ose at : see DOSE
,_. _ put salt on the tail of capture. 
a sacred cow: see cow. ;. This phrase alludes to the humorous
saddle advice traditionally given to young children
in the saddle on horseback. in a position L.. 3 . 6. ! . ;h. a.. ti d:
of control or responsibility.u. 4 iL,x. 
rrub salt into the or someone wound» make a painful experience even more
painful for someone. 
better safe than sorry: see BETTER... .... _.... ,
salt the books fraudulently increase the
safe as houses: see HOUSE. apparent value of an invoice or account. 
a safe bet: see BET. informal
a safe pair of hands: see HAND. salt a mine fraudulently make a mine appear
to be on the safe side in order to have a to be a paying one by placing rich ore into
margin of security against risks. it- informal
2000 Tom Clancy The Bear and the Dragon To be the salt of the earth a person or group of
on the safe side, the messagesl were super- people of greate kindness, reliability, or
encryptedmadeSafetythere at thewithsafety Nationalin a 256-bitnumbersSecurity
system Agency. 
being nspecially
a group of. aOr. tThisphrasecomesfrornMatthew5:13: Ye
ihonesty. sa f t. earth: 8 !if the
but 6
1 have. salt ; :. JjSamaritan 252
sit below the salt be of lower social standing : The image here is of the sand in an
or worth. hourglass moving from the upper chamberto the lower. 
This expression derives from the former
custom of placing a large salt cellar midway
down a long dining table at which people sandboy
were seated in order of rank. happy as a sandboy: see HAPPY. 
take something with a pinch or grain of sandwich
salt regard something as exaggerated;
the meat or filling in the sandwich a
believe only part of something. 
person who is awkwardly caught between
1998 Bookseller Meanwhile... readers shouldtwo opposing factions. 
take the quotes they see with a pinch of salt. 
a sandwich or two sandwiches short of
worth your salt good or competent at the job
or profession specified. a picnic of a person stupid or crazy. 
2000 Saga Magazine Every place setting is informal
measured with a ruler because no butler
worth his salt wants to get to the end of a table sardine
with say, four settings left, and nowhere to put packed like sardines crowded very close
them. together. Samaritan sauce
what sauce for the goose is sauce for the
good Samaritan a charitable or helpfulgander what is appropriate in one case isperson. 
also appropriate in the other case in
l the Bible, Jesus tells the parable of a question, proverb
man who went down from Jerusalem to
ericho and fell among thieves Luke 10. The This expression is often used as a
first two people who came across him lying statement that what is right or wrong for one stripped and wounded by the side of the road sex is right or wrong for the other as well. 
passed by on the other side. It was the third John Ray, who was the first to record this
man, a Samaritan i. a man from Samaria saying in his English Proverbs of 1670,
who took pity on him and helped him. remarked This is a woman Proverb. 

1998 New Scientist What is sauce for the US
goose is sauce for the Iraqi gander!sameby the same token: see TOKEN. saucer
one and the same the same person or thing
have eyes like saucers have your eyesused for emphasis. 
opened wide in amazement. 1999 David Mitchell Ghostwritten Everybody
both in heaven and hell wanted one and the
same thing: meat in their bellies. sausage
not a sausage nothing at all. British informal
same difference used to express the
speaker belief that two or more things are
essentially the same, in spite of apparentsave
differences, informal be unable to do something to save your life
same here the same applies to me. informal used to indicate that the person in question
1993 Andy McNab Bravo Two Zero ve still got is very incompetent at doing something. 
my map and compass, said. Yeah, same The first recorded use of this expression
here. is by Anthony Trollope in The Kellys and
0 Ceys1848: If it was to save my life and theirs, can get up small talk for the rector 
sand and his curate. 
built on sand: see BUILT. 
bury your head in the sand: see BURY. save your breath: see BREATH. 
rope of sand: see ROPE. save the day or situation find or provide a
solution to a difficulty or disaster. 
run into the sand: see RUN. 1990 Richard Critchf ield Among the British
the sands of time are running out the When the postwar social fabric started to tear,
allotted time is nearly at an end. amid a stagnant economy and global
253 school
decline... Edward Heath... was supposed to turn the scales or balance alter the
save the day. He failed to deliver. probability of the outcome. 
save face: see FACE. 
save someone skin or neck or bacon scarce
rescue someone from danger or difficulty. make yourself scarce surreptitiously
disappear; keep out of the way. informalsaved
saved by the bell preserved from danger scare
narrowly or by an unexpected inter- scare the daylights out of: see frighten the
vention. daylights out of at DAYLIGHT. 
In boxing matches a contestant who has scene
been knocked to the floor can be saved from behind the scenes in private; secretly. 
being counted out by the ringing of the bell to mark the end of a round. This expression alludes to the area out of sight of the public at the back of a theatre: stage. say
have something or nothing to say for change of scene or scenery a move to
yourself contribute or fail to contribute to different surroundings. 
a conversation or discussion. not your scene not something you are
say the word give permission or instructions interested in. informal
to do something. set the scene describe a place or situation
in which something is about to happen. 
saying create the conditions for a future event. 
go without saying be too well known or
obvious to need to be mentioned. scenery
there is no saying it is impossible to know. chew the scenery: see CHEW. 
scabbard scent
throw away the scabbard abandon all on the scent of an animal following the
thought of making peace. scent of its quarry, in possession of a
This expression derives from the proverb juseful clue in a search or investigation. 
he who draws his sword against his prince put or throw someone off the scent
must throw away the scabbard. It impliesthat mislead someone in the course of a search
the person in question has no choice but to or investigation. 
fightschemescalded the scheme of things the organization of
like a scalded cat at a very fast speed. things in general; the way the world is. 
1997 T3 If you re in a desperate hurry you can
bury the accelerator... and take off like a schmear
scalded cat. the whole schmear everything possible or
available; every aspect of something. North
scale American informal
the scales fall from someone eyes
someone is no longer deceived. Schmear also spelled schmeer. shmear, or shmeer means bribery or flattery , and
In the Bible, this expression described comes from the Yiddish verb schmirn how St Paul, blinded by his vision on the road meaning grease or flatter. 
to Damascus, received his sight back at the
hand of God Acts 9:18. 1970 Lawrence Sanders The Anderson Tapes
want a complete list... Any thing and
throw something on or into the scale everything... The whole shmear. 
emphasize the relevance of something toone side of an argument or debate. school
tip or turn the scales at have a weight of a of the old school: see OLD. 
specified amount. the old school tie: see OLD. 
science 254
the school of hard knocks painful or difficult would start from a position without any
experiences that are seen to be useful in advantage. The expression up to scratch
teaching someone about life. see below also comes from this sense of
the noun scratch: a competitor who was up to school of thought a particular way of scratch was of a good enough standard
thinking, especially one not followed by to start a race. the speaker. 
scratch a — and find a — an investigation of
science someone or something will soon reveal
blind someone with science: see BLIND. their true nature. 
The first version of this expression used in ;
score English, in the early 19th century, was a
know the score be aware of the essential translation of a remark attributed to
facts about a situation, informal Napoleon: grattez le Russe et vous trouverez 
le Tartare, scratch the Russian and you will
on that or this score so far as that or this is find the Tartar. 
concerned. 
1924 George Bernard Shaw St Joan Scratch
score an own goal: see GOAL. an Englishman and find a Protestant. 
score points: see POINT. scratch your head think hard in order to
settle or pay a or the score take revenge find a solution to something. feel or
on someone for something damaging that express bewilderment, informal
they have done in the past. scratch the surface deal with a matter only
Scout in the most superficial way. initiate the
briefest investigation to discover some Scout honour used to indicate that you thing concealed. 
have the honourable standards associated
with Scouts, and so will stand by a promise up to scratch up to the required standard;
or tell the truth, informal satisfactory. 
you scratch my back and ll scratch yours if
A Scout is a member of the Scout
Association, an organization for boys !
you do me a favour, will return it. proverb
founded in 1908 by Lord Baden-Powell with
the aim of developing their character by screw
have a screw loose be slightly eccentric or
training them in self-sufficiency and survival
techniques in the outdoors. mentally disturbed, informal
put the screws on exert strong psychological
scrape pressure on someone so as to intimidate
them into doing something, informal
scrape acquaintance with contrive to get to
know, dated tighten or turn the screw or screws exert
1992 Atlantic thought how lucky the Crimms strong pressure on someone, informal
were to have scraped acquaintance with me, a final or last turn of the screw an
for seldom reveal my identity to ordinary additional amount of pressure or hardship
people on my jaunts around the world. applied to a situation that is already
scrape the barrel or the bottom of the extremely difficult to bear, informal
barrel be reduced to using things orpeople of the poorest quality because screwed
there is nothing else available, informal
have your head screwed on the right wayscratch have common sense, informal
from scratch from the very beginning,especially without utilizing or relying on Scylla
any previous work for assistance. Scylla and Charybdis used to refer to a
situation involving two dangers in which
In certain sports, the scratch was an attempt to avoid one increases the risk
originally the line or mark drawn to indicate from the other, literary
the point from which competitors had to start a race unless they had been awarded an In classical mythology, Scya was a female ;
advantage and were able to start ahead of sea monster who devoured sailors when they thisline. So. acompetitorstartingfromscratc tried to navigate the narrow channel
255 seize
between her and the whirlpool Charybdis. In second childhood a state of childishness
later legends, Scylla was a dangerous rock, that sometimes occurs in old age. 
located on the Italian side of the Strait of
Messina, a channel which separatesthe island second to none surpassed by no other. 
of Sicily from the toe of Italy. 1961 Joseph Heller Catch-22 He would stand
second to none in his devotion to country. 
sea section
all at sea confused or unable to decide what the golden section: see GOLDEN. 
to do. 1993 Sheila Stewart Ramlin Rose She had a lotsee
of bodily sufferin. Mr Statham and the Girls see the back of: see BACK. 
couldn stand it; they was all at sea. see someone coming recognize a person
seal who can be fooled or deceived, informal
put or set the seal on put the finishing see eye to eye: see EYE. 
touch to. see a man about a dog used euphemistically
set or put your seal to or on mark with when leaving to go to the lavatory or if you
your own distinctive character. do not wish to disclose the nature of the
errand you are about to undertake, humorousThe reference in both of these idioms is
to the former practice of stamping your see reason: see REASON. 
personal seal on a completed letter or other see someone right make sure that a person is
document. appropriately rewarded or looked after. 
British informal
sealed see something coming foresee or be
someone lips are sealed: see LIP. prepared for an event, typically an
seam unpleasant one. 
bursting or bulging at the seams of a place see your way clear to do or doing
or building full to overflowing, informal something find that it is possible or
come or fall apart at the seams 0of a convenient to do something. 
thing fall to pieces. of a person; have an seed
emotional breakdown; collapse, informal go or run to seed Qof a plant cease
Seams are the lines along which pieces of flowering as the seeds develop. 
fabric or the planks of a boat are joined, 0 deteriorate in condition, strength, or
perceived as the points most likely to be
damaged or weakened. efficiency. 
sow the seed: see sow. season seeing
a man for all seasons: see A N. be seeing things be hallucinating. 
1987 Rohinton Mistry TalesfromFirozsha Baag
seat How much fun they made of me. Calling me
crazy, saying it is time for old ayah to go back
by the seat of your pants by instinct rather to Goa... she is seeing things. 
than logic or knowledge, informal seeing is believing you need to see
This expression was first used by pilots in something before you can accept that it
the mid 20th century, in the form fly by the really exists or occurs, proverb
seat of your pants, meaning fly a plane by seen
relying on human judgement rather than
have seen better days: see DAY. 
navigational instruments. 
1977 Martin Walker National Front Mussolini seize
had governed by the seat of his pants, guided seize the day make the most of the present
in part by his early Socialism, in part by moment. 
his... bombastic nationalism. This expression is a translation of Latin
second carpe diem, originally a quotation from the
Roman poet Horace. 
play second fiddle to: see FIDDLE. 
sell 256sell serve
sell someone or something short fail to serve your time hold office for the normal
recognize or state the true value of period. spend time in office, an
someone or something. apprenticeship, or prison. 
1998 Times Mr Ashdown may secure his seat in serve two masters take orders from two
the Cabinet, but he will have bought it by superiors or follow two conflicting or
selling liberal principles short. 
opposing principles or policies at the same
sell someone a bill of goods: see BILL. time. 
sell someone a dummy: see DUMMY. 
This phrase alludes to the warning given ;
sell someone a pup: see PUP. in the Bible against trying to serve both God :
sell someone down the river: see RIVER. and Mammon Matthew 6:24. 
sell like hot cakes: see CAKE. sell the pass: see PASS. sesame
sell your soul to the devi or be willing to open sesame: see OPEN. 
do anything, no matter how wrong, in
order to achieve your objective. set
be set in stone: see be carved in stone at
The reference here is to a contract STONE. 
supposedly made with the devil by certain
people: in return for granting them all their !
set eyes on: see clap eyes on at EYE. 
desires in this life, the devil would receive make a dead set at: see DEAD. 
their souls for all eternity. The most famous set your face against: see FACE. 
person reputed to have entered into such a
contract was the 16th-century German set your hand to: see HAND. 
astronomer and necromancer Faust, who set your heart or hopes on have a strong
became the subject of plays by Goethe and desire for or to do. 
Marlowe and a novel by Thomas Mann. 
set little or much or a great deal byconsider to be of little or great value. 
send set out your stal isplay or show off
send someone flying cause someone to be your abilities, attributes, or experience
violently flung to the ground. in order to convince someone of your
send someone packing: see PACKING. suitability for something. make
send someone to Coventry: see COVENTRY. your position on an issue very clear. British
set the scene: see SCENE. 
sense set store by: see STORE. 
bring someone to their senses cause set your teeth clench your teeth together,
someone to think and behave reasonably become resolute. 
after a period of folly or irrationality. 
set the wheels in motion do something to
come to your senses become reasonable begin a process or put a plan into action. 
after acting foolishly. 
set the world alight or on fire achieve
see sense: see see reason at REASON. something sensational, informal
take leave of your senses go mad. 
A British variant of this expression is set the Thames on fire. separate
go your separate ways leave in a different 1976 Dick Francis In the Frame He was the sam
direction from someone with whom you sort of man my father had been, middle-aged,
middle-of-the-road, expert at his chosen job
have just travelled or spent time. end a but unlikely to set the world on fire. 
romantic, professional, or other
relationship. settle
separate the men from the boys: see MAN. settle someone hash: see HASH. 
separate the sheep from the goats: see settle a score: see SCORE. 
SHEEP. 
separate the wheat from the chaff: see seven
WHEAT. seven-league boots: see BOOT. 257 share
seventh This expression comes from Jesus  
instructions to his disciples: And whosoever !
in seventh heaven: see HEAVEN. shall not receive ... when ye depart out
of that house or city, shake off the dust ofshade your feet Matthew 10:14. 
a shade — a little —. informal
1984 Armistead Maupin Babycakes Shall we go shake or quake in your shoes or boots
a shade lighter... Pink it up a bit? tremble with apprehension. 
shades of — used to suggest reminiscence of shake a leg make a start; rouse yourself. 
or comparison with someone or something informal
specified. 1995 Trevor Ferguson The Ere line Shake a leg. We re outta here. 
The sense of shade alluded to here is
shadow or ghost. shamrock
1991 Cordelia Mansal iscover Astrology drown the shamrock drink, or go drinking
Perhaps it is shades of the way your mother on St Patrick day. 
had to reject her own brilliance. You have a
veryfinebrain which you tend to put down. The shamrock with its three-lobed leaves !
was said to have been used by St Patrick, the shadow patron saint of Ireland, to illustrate the
doctrine of the Trinity. It is now used as thebe frightened of your own shadow be
national emblem of Ireland. unreasonably timid or nervous. 
wear yourself to a shadow completely
exhaust yourself through overwork. Shanks pony
on Shanks pony using your own legs as a
shaggy means of transport. 
a shaggy-dog story a long, rambling story or
Shanks from the Old English word
joke, especially one that is amusing only sceanca, leg bone is now used as an
because it is absurdly inconsequential or informal term for legs. The original form of !
pointless. the expression was on Shanks mare. 
The expression, dating back to the 1940s, comes from the subject of one such anecdote, shape
a dog with shaggy hair. 
get into shape or get someone into shape
1993 New York Times Book Review The book has become or make someone physically
the unhurried pace of the best of the shaggy fitter by exercise. 
dog stories; the pleasure is all in the journey lick or knock or whip someone or
rather than the destination. something into shape act forcefully to
bring someone or something into a fitter,shakemore efficient, or better-organized state. 
get or give someone a fair shake get or
give someone just treatment or a fair This expression originally referred to the ;
chance, informal belief, expressed in some early bestiaries, that !
bear cubs were born as formless lumps and
in two shakes of a lamb tail very quickly. ! were literally licked into shape by their
more — than you can shake a stick at used to ! mother. A bestiary was a treatise about
different types of animal, popular especially Iemphasize the largeness of an amount. 
in medieval times. informal
1996 Hong Kong & Macau: Rough Guide There the are shape of things to come the way the
more organised tours of Hong Kong than you
can shake a stick at and... some are worth future is likely to develop. 
considering. shape up or ship out used as an ultimatum to
no great shakes not very good or significant. someone to improve their performance or
informal behaviour or face being made to leave. 
1989 Guy Vanderhaeghe Homesick got specs informal, chiefly North American
now. Catch better with them than before, butstill am no great shakes at ball. share
shake the dust off your feet leave a place share and share alike have or receive an
indignantly or disdainfully. equal share; share things equally. 
sharp 258sharp shelf
look sharp: see LOOK. off the shelf not designed or made to order
sharp as a needle extremely quick-witted. but taken from existing stock or supplies. A
on the shelf of people or things no longer 
North American variant is sharp as auseful or desirable. of a woman past antack. 
age when she might expect to have the
the sharp end the most important or opportunity to marry, of a music
influential part of an activity or process, recording or a film awaiting release on the
the side of a system or activity which market after being recorded. 
is the most unpleasant or suffers thechief impact, the bow of a ship. British shell
humorous come out of or retreat into your shell
become less or more shy and retiring. she
who she — the cat mother? used as a shield
mild reproof, especially to a child, for the other side of the shield: see the other
impolite use of the pronoun she when a side of the coin at COIN. 
person name would have been more well the reverse of the shield: see the reverse of
mannered. expressing the speaker the medal at MEDAL. 
belief that a woman or girl has a high
opinion of herself or is putting on airs. British two sides of a shield two ways of looking at
informai something; two sides to a question. shift
sheep make shift do what you want to do in spite of
the black sheep: see BLACK. not having ideal conditions; get along
count sheep count imaginary sheep jumping somehow. over a fence one by one in an attempt to
send yourself to sleep. shift for yourself manage as best you can
1977 Harvey Pitcher When Miss Emmie without help. 
was in Russia Did you know that if you count shift your ground say or write something
sheep, it is watching the sheep jump that that contradicts something you have
sends you off?previously written or said. make sheep eyes at someone look at
someone in a foolishly amorous way. shilling
not the full shilling not mentally alert or
separate the sheep from the goats divide
people or things into superior and inferior quick-thinking. 
groups. take the King or Queen shilling enlist as
This expression alludes to the parable of ja soldier. British
It was once the practice to pay a shilling to the Last Judgement in Matthew 25:32-3:
a man who enlisted as a soldier. 
And before him shall be gathered all nations: and he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd divideth his sheep from the shine
goats: and he shall set the sheep on his right take the shine off spoil the brilliance or
hand, but the goats on the left. 
excitement of; overshadow. take a shine to take a fancy to; develop a
sheet liking for. informaltwo or three sheets to or in the wind
drunk, informal shingle
hang out your shingle begin to practise a
The origins of this expression are nautical. 
Sheets here are the ropes attached to the
profession. North American
corners of a ship sail, used for controlling The main and oldest sense of shingle is a
the extent and direction of the sail; if they are wooden roofing tile , but in the early 19th
hanging loose in the wind, the vessel is likely century the word developed the more
to be out of control or taking an erratic general sense of a piece of board , while in
course. the USA it also acquired the particular259 shoot
meaning a small signboard. Literally, i vulgar slang
hanging out your shingle refers to hanging
up a sign that advertises your profession. be built like a brick shithouse of a person
have a very solid physique. ship vulgar slang
rats deserting a sinking ship: see RAT. be scared or bored shitless be extremely
run a tight ship: see TIGHT. frightened or bored. 
ships that pass in the night transitory shockacquaintances. future shock: see FUTURE. 
This expression comes from Henry short, sharp shock a brief but harsh
Wadsworth Longfellow poem Tales of a custodial sentence imposed on offenders in
Wayside Inn 1874. an attempt to discourage them from
when someone ship comes in or home committing further offences, a severe
when someone fortune is made. measure taken in order to effect quick
results. This expression dates back to the period
of Britain maritime empire, when the safe The Home Secretary William Whitelaw
arrival of a valuable cargo meant an instant advocated the short sharp shock as a form of fortune for the owner and those who had : corrective treatment for young offenders at
shares in the enterprise. the 1979 Conservative Party Conference; the
deterrent value of such a regime was to be its
severityratherthanthelengthoftimeserved. 
shipshapeshipshape and Bristol fashion with every thing in good order. shoeanother pair of shoes quite a different
Recorded from the mid 19th century, this !
term originally referred to the commercialmatter or state of things. 
prosperity of the port of Bristol and the goodbe in another person shoes be in another
condition of its shipping. person situation or predicament. 
dead men shoes property or a position
shirt coveted by a prospective successor but
keep your shirt on don lose your temper; available only on a person death. 
stay calm, informal if the shoe fits» wear it: see if the cap fits,
lose your shirt lose all your possessions, wear it at CAP. 
especially as the result of unwise financial wait for the other shoe to drop wait for the
transactions, informal next or final thing to happen. North American
put your shirt on bet all you have on; be sure where the shoe pinches where your
of. British informa ifficulty or trouble is. 
the shirt off your back your last remaining shoot
possessions as offered to another person. shoot the breeze or the bull have a casual
 vulgar slang conversation. North American informal
be shitting bricks be extremely nervous or shoot your cuffs pull your shirt cuffs out to
frightened. project beyond the cuffs of your jacket or
not know shit from Shinola be very ignorant coat. 
or innocent. US shoot someone or something down in 
Shinola is the proprietary name of a US
flames forcefully destroy an argument orbrand of boot polish. proposal. 
1999 BBC Top Gear Magazine ve been shot
up shit creek in an awkward predicament. down in flames by the boys in the Top Gear
office for saying this, but reckon the Porsche
when the shit hits the fan when a situation Boxster has to be one of the most beautifully
becomes critical; when the disastrous sculpted bits of artwork going. 
consequences of something become shoot from the hip react suddenly or
public. without careful consideration of yourwords or actions, informalshooting 260
shoot it out engage in a decisive make short work of accomplish, consume,
confrontation, typically a gun battle. or destroy quickly. 
informal a sandwich short of a picnic: see SANDWICH. 
shoot a line describe something in an short and sweet brief and pleasant. 
exaggerated, untruthful, or boastful way. the short end of the stick the disadvantage in
British informai a situation; a bad deal. 
shoot your mouth off talk boastfully or 1994 Hispanic Latinas are getting the short
indiscreetly, informal end of the stick when it comes to equality in
shoot yourself in the foot inadvertently the business world and seeking financing for
make a situation worse for yourself; their businesses. 
demonstrate gross incompetence, informal short, sharp shock: see SHOCK. 
1997 Spectator The only thing the Royal Opera
seems to have done successfully is shoot itself shotin the foot. 
a big shot: see a big cheese at BIG. by a long shot by far; outstandingly, informal
shootingthe whole shooting match everything. call the shots: see CALL. 
informal get or be shot of get or be rid of. British
1989 Patrick Brian The Thirteen Gun Salute informal
have seen all the great houses brought down, give it your best shot try as hard as you can
Coutts, Drummonds, Hoares, the whole
shooting match. to do something, informal
like a shot without hesitation; willingly. 
shop informal
all over the shop orshow everywhere; in not a shot in your locker no money or
al irections, in a state of disorder or chances left. British
confusion, wildly or erratically, informal The locker referred to in this expression
is a compartment in which ammunition is
All over the shop was first recorded as ! kept. 
British pugilistic slang in Hotten Slang
Dictionary of 1874: to inflict severe not by a long shot by no means. 
punishment on an opponent was to knockhim all over the shop. 
1991 Zee Edgell In Times Like These Even though
we had a very good crowd at the meeting
tonight we weren at full strength, not by alive over the shop: see LIVE. long shot. 
talk shop discuss matters concerning your
a shot in the arm stimulus or encourage-work, especially in circumstances where
this is inappropriate. ment, informal
1990 G. Gordon Liddy The Monkey Handlers a shot in the dark: see DARK. 
Lawyers talk shop, bounce ideas off one shot to pieces or to hell ruined, informal
another all the time. shotgun
short ride shotgun: see RIDE. be caught or taken short be put at a
disadvantage, urgently need to urinate shoulder
or defecate. British informal be on someone shoulder keep a close
a brick short of a load: see BRICK. check on someone, informal
bring or pull someone up short make 1998 Times No England manager can control
his players... can be on their shoulder week
someone check or pause abruptly. in and week out. 
get or have someone by the short and look over your shoulder be anxious or
curlies or short hairs have complete insecure about a possible danger. 
control of a person, informal 1990 Daily Star The chief executive... toasted
in short order immediately; rapidly, chiefly the lifting of the takeover threat. Now they
can get on with running the business while
North American not looking over their shoulders, says one city
in the short run or term over a brief period analyst. 
of time. 261 shutter
put your shoulder to the wheel set to work The image here is of players revealing
vigorously. their cards in a card game. 
The image here is of pushing with your show a leg get out of bed; get up. British
shoulder against the wheel of a cart or other informal, dated
vehicle that has become stuck. 
show of hands the raising of hands among
rub shoulders with: see RUB. a group of people to indicate a vote for or
a shoulder to cry on someone who listens against something, with numbers typically
sympathetically to another person being estimated rather than counted. 
problems. show your teeth reveal your strength; be
shoulder to shoulder side by side. acting aggressive. British
together towards a common aim. show someone the door dismiss or eject
someone from a place. 
Sense 2 developed from the idea of 1991 Michael Curtin The Plastic Tomato Cutter
soldiers standing side by side in unbroken Mr Yendall, would you credit had applicants
ranks. who scorned the wages? showed them the
door. straight from the shoulder: see STRAIGHT. shower
shout send someone to the showers fail early on in
in with a shout having a good chance, informal a race or contest. North American informal
shout the odds talk loudly and in an
opinionated way. shred
a thing of shreds and patches something
shouting made up of scraps of fabric patched
all over bar the shouting of a contest together, literary
almost finished and therefore virtually In the third act of Wamet, the prince
decided, informa escribes his uncle Claudius, who has usurped the throne, as a king of shreds and patches ; shove this description was parodied by W. S. Gilbert in The Mikado as a thing of shreds and
if push comes to shove: see PUSH. patches. show
all over the show: see all over the shop at shuffle
SHOP. be or get lost in the shuffle be overlooked
get or keep the show on the road start or or missed in a confused or crowded
keep going an enterprise or organization. situation. North American informal
informalshuffle the cards change policy or direction. 
1997 Spectator Much rarer... is the journalist shuffle off this mortal coil: see COIL. 
who helps to keep the national show on theroad. shut
give the whole show away demonstrate be or get shut of be or get rid of. informal
the inadequacies or reveal the truth of shut the door on: see close the door on at
something. DOOR. 
the only show in town the only or most shut your mind to: see close your mind to at
significant thing. MIND. 
1998 New Scientist This should scupper the shut the stable door after the horse has
laser idea, and yet, with no other explana- bolted: see STABLE. 
tions on offer, it the only show in town. 
show someone a clean pair of heels retreat shut up shop cease trading, either
temporarily or permanently. stop some
speedily; run away, informal activity, informal
show your colours: see COLOURS. 
show the flag: see FLAG. shutter
show your hand or cards disclose your put up the shutters of a business cease
plans. trading either for the day or permanently. 
shy 262
shy relationship in addition to your legal or
have a shy at try to hit something, especially regular partner. served separately from
with a ball or stone. the main dish. 
the other side of the coin: see COIN. sick sidelines
sick and tired annoyed about or bored with on or from the sidelines in orfroma
something and unwilling to put up with it position where you are observing a
any longer, informal situation but are unable or unwilling to be
sick as a dog extremely ill. informa irectly involved in it. 
sick as a parrot extremely disappointed. In sports such as football and basketball, humorous the sidelines mark the long edges of a playing !
area, behind which spectators, coaches, and This expression is a late 20th-century other non-players must remain. 
British catchphrase, often associated with
disappointed footballers or footballmanagers. sideways
1998 New Scientist Many of my MP colleaguesknock someone sideways: see K K. 
are as sick as the proverbial parrot that Lord
Sainsbury has been appointed to succeed John sight
Battle as Britain science minister. heave in sight: see HEAVE. 
the sick man of—a country that is politically in or within your sights within the scope
or economically unsound, especially in of your ambitions or expectations. 
comparison with its neighbours in the
The image in this phrase and in raise your
region specified. sights and set your sights on below is of a
In the late 19th century, following a target visible through the sights of a gun. 
reported comment by Tsar Nicholas of Russia !
about the moribund state of the Turkish out of sight, out of mind you soon forget
empire, the Sultan of Turkey was described as people or things that are no longer visible
the Sick Man of Europe. The term was later or present, proverb
extended to Turkey itself and subsequently raise or lower your sights become more or
applied to other countries. 
less ambitious; increase or lower your
1992 Independent He vilified the West as expectations. 
the sick man of the modern world and set your sights on have as an ambition; hope
attacked its institutions as the dictatorship strongly to achieve or reach. 
of the majority dressed up as democracy. 1996 Home Within ten minutes had made an
sick to death very annoyed by something and offer... But another couple has also set their
unwilling to put up with it any longer. sights on the cottage, so sealed bids were
submitted. informala sight for sore eyes a person or thing that is
sick to your stomach feeling nauseous. 
very attractive or that you are extremely
disgusted. pleased or relieved to see. informal
worried sick so anxious as to make yourself a sight more — or a sight — than or a sight
ill. too — someone or something has a great
side deal or too much of a particular specified
quality, informal
let the side down fail to meet the 1994 New Scientist Some did bottle
expectations of your colleagues or friends, experiments in the lab, under tightly
especially by mismanaging something. controlled conditions but usually involving
British ust two species; real life is a sight more
on the — side rather —. complicated than that. 
1996 Wanderlust This is a serious jacket with
big pockets and a well thought out design, sign
though a little on the heavy side, sign of the times something typical of the
on the side Qui addition to your regular job or nature or quality of a particular period,
as a subsidiary source of income. secretly, typically something undesirable. 
especially with regard to a sexual sign on the dotted line agree formally. 
263 sin
1921 P. G. Wodehouse Indiscretions ofArchie when newspapers often publish trivia
spoke to him as one oldfriendto because of a lack of important news. 
another... and he sang a few bars from chiefly British
Rigoletto , and signed on the dotted line. 
This concept and phrase date back to the signed mid 19th century. In high summer Victorian
signed, sealed, and delivered orsigned and London was deserted by the wealthy and
important during the period in which
sealed formally and officially agreed and
Parliament and the law courts were in recess, iin effect. silence silver
silence is golden it often wise to say be born with a silver spoon in your mouth
nothing, proverb be born into a wealthy family of high social
standing. The fuller form of the saying is speech is
silver, but silence is golden. have a silver tongue be eloquent or
persuasive. silent on a silver platter or salver without having
silent as the grave: see GRAVE. been asked or sought for; without
requiring any effort or return from the
the silent majority the majority of people,
recipient. regarded as holding moderate opinions but
rarely expressing them. The image here is of a butler or waiter
presenting something on a silver tray. 
This phrase was first particularly
associated with the US President Richard a silver lining a positive or more hopeful
Nixon, who claimed in his 1968 presidential aspect to a bad situation, even though this
election campaign to speak for this segment may not be immediately apparent. 
of society. The full form of the phrase is the proverb 1998 Spectator Independent-thinking every cloud has a silver lining. 
columnists claimed a silent majority loathed
Di mania and maybe they were right. the silver screen the cinema industry;
the silent treatment a stubborn refusal to cinema films collectively. 
talk to someone, especially after a recent
argument or disagreement. In the early days of cinematography, a
projection screen was covered with metallic
2000 Independent Since the complaint, Mspaint to give a highly reflective, silver Thomas, who has worked for the City police
coloured surface. since 1994, claims she has been given the
silent treatment. Simon Pure
silk the real Simon Pure the real or genuine
make a silk purse out of a sow ear turn person or thing. 
something inferior into something of top
Simon Pure is a character in Susannah
quality. Centlivre A Bold Stroke for a Wife 1717,
The observation that you can tmake a silk who for part of the play is impersonated by
purse out of a sow ear has been proverbial another character. 
since the late 16th century; there was an
earlier version which featured a goat fleece instead of a sow ear. sin
— as sin having a particular undesirable
quality to a high degree, informal
silly 1991 Robert R. McCammon Boy Life
— yourself silly be unable to act rationally Everybody knew Saxon Lake was as deep as
because of doing something to excess. sin. 
1998 Time Out N. Y. Drink yourself silly at the for your sins used to suggest that a task or
long bar or chow down at the large tables in duty is so onerous or unpleasant that it
the back. must be a punishment, chiefly British
the silly season the months of August 1994 John Birmingham He Died With Felafel In
and September regarded as the time His Hand Then the extended family that is
sing 264
Brisbane sent some people along to keep me sit on someone tai rive extremely close
company, and for my sins, took them in. behind another vehicle, typically while
like sin vehemently or forcefully, informal waiting for a chance to overtake. 
sit tight Oremain firmly in your place. 
sing refrain from taking action or changing
sing a different tune or song change your your mind, informal
opinion about or attitude towards someone 0 1 8 4 Studs Terkel The Good War Our colonel
or something. told everyone to sit tight, don leave the camp. 
sing for your supper: see SUPPER. sit up and take notice suddenly start paying
sing from the same hymn or song sheet attention or have your interest aroused. 
present a united front in public by not informaldisagreeing with one another. British informal
2000 South China Morning Post We re all singing six
from the same hymn sheet and there is a real at sixes and sevens in a state of total
will to clean up the game, though it may confusion or disarray. 
take a life ban to restore cricket credibility. Tn  
phrase originated as gambling slang
and may be an alteration or corruption of Old
singe French cinque five and sice six, these being
singe your wings suffer harm, especially in a the highest numbers on dice. The idea of
risky attempt. risking all your goods on the two highest
numbers led to the idea of carelessness and
neglect of your possessions and eventually to singing the development of the phrase current
all-singing, all-dancing: see ALL. meaning. 
sink 1998 Oldie But if you arrive in the afternoon
we may be a bit at sixes and sevens as we re
everything but the kitchen sink: see doing a wedding reception. KITCHEN. 
hit or knock someone for six affect some sink or swim fail or succeed entirely by your one very severely; utterly overwhelm
own efforts. someone. British informal
sinking In this expression, six stands for six runs,
referring to a hit in cricket which sends the
a or that sinking feeling an unpleasant ball clear over the boundary of the ground
feeling caused by the realization that for a score of six runs. 
something unpleasant or undesirable has
happened or is about to happen. six feet under dead and buried, informal
Six feet is the traditiona epth of a grave, jsiren
siren song or call the appeal of something six of one and half a dozen of the other used
that is also considered to be harmful or to convey that there is no rea ifference
dangerous. between two alternatives. 
In classical mythology, the Sirens were sea ! nymphs whose beautiful singing lured sailors jsixpence
to their doom on submerged rocks. on a sixpence of a stop or turn within a
small area or short distance. British informal
sit The old sixpenny coin was one of the
smallest in circulation prior to decimalization sit at someone feet be someone pupil or
in 1971. follower. sit loosely on not be very binding. 
sit on the fence: see F sixty-four
the sixty-four thousand dollar question
sit on your hands take no action. something that is not known and on which
1998 Times The England selectors, historically, a great dea epends. 
find reasons to sit on their hands. 
sit heavy on the stomach of food take a expression dates from the 1940s and was originally the sixty-four dollar question, long time to be digested. 265 slap
from a question posed for the top prize in a 1998 Times A student of the Method school,
broadcast quiz show. he has to get under the skin of the character heportrays. 
1996 Independent Will conversion make the
society a better business? That is the $64,000 give someone some skin shake or slap
question. hands together as a gesture of friendship or
solidarity. US black slang
size have a thick or thin skin be insensitive or
that about the size of it said to confirm a
oversensitive to criticism or insults. 
person assessment of a situation,
especially one regarded as bad. informal it no skin off my nose it a matter of
indifference to me; am unaffected by
skate something, informal
get your skates on make haste; hurry up. there more than one way to skin a cat
British informal there more than one way of achieving
your aim. skating There are several traditional proverbs
skating on thin ice: see ICE. along these lines, for example there are more ways of killing a cat than choking it with cream. 
skeletona skeleton at the feast: see a ghost at under the skin in reality, as opposed to
the feast at FEAST. superficial appearances. 
a skeleton in the cupboard a discreditable or
embarrassing fact that someone wishes to skirt
keep secret. a bit of skirt: see a bit of fluff at BIT. 
A US variant of this expression is a skull
skeleton in the closet. 
out of your skull out of your mind; crazy,
very drunk, informalskid
hit the skids begin a rapid decline or sky
deterioration, informal the sky is the limit there is practically no
limit. 
The origin of skid is uncertain, but it
1991 Nation He proudly proclaims that today
may be connected with the Old Norse word
in Russia the sky is the limit to what a person
from which English ski is derived. It is
used here and in the next two entries in the
can earn. 
sense of a plank or roller on which a heavy to the skies very highly; enthusiastically. 
object may be placed in order to move it 1989 Gay Daly Pre-Raphaelites in love Gabriel
easily. wrote to his little sister praising Lizzie to theskies. 
on the skids of a person or their career in abad state; failing, informal
1989 Thomas Berger The Changing Past Jackie
slackarrived at middle age with a career on the cut someone some slack allow someone
skids. some leeway; make allowances for
someone behaviour. North American informal
put the skids under hasten the decline or 1998 Times Most, though, are willing to cut
failure of. informal Spielberg some slack for the sake of cinematic
interpretation. 
skin take or pick up the slack pull on the loose
be skin and bone be very thin. end or part of a rope in order to make it
by the skin of your teeth by a very narrow taut, use up a surplus or improve the use
margin; only just. of resources to avoid an undesirable lull in
get under someone skin annoy or irritate business. 
someone intensely, fill someone mind
in a compelling and continual way. reach slap
a deep understanding of someone. a slap in the face or eye an unexpected
informal rejection or affront. slate 266
1996 Independent The move was seen as situation that is currently causing no
another slap in the face for the monarchy in problems, but may wel so as a
Australia. consequence of such interference, proverb
slap on the wrist a mild reprimand or
punishment. In the early 14th century the French
phrase esveillez pas lou chien qui dort
1997 New Scientist Last week, in a Washington advised do notwakethesleeping dog , while district court, a judge ordered software giant Chaucer remarks in Troilus and Criseyde it is
Microsoft to stop forcing PC-makers to install nought good a slepyng hound to wake. The
both Windows 95 and its Web browser,present form of the proverb seems to be
Internet Explorer. So far, though, it is just a
traceable to Walter Scott novel Redgauntlet 
slap on the wrist. 1824. 
slap someone on the back congratulate
someone heartily. sleeve
slate have an ace up your sleeve: see ACE. 
on the or your slate to be paid for later; on have a card up your sleeve: see CARD. 
credit. British laugh up your sleeve: see LAUGH. 
Shops and bars formerly kept a record of roll up your sleeves: see ROLL. 
what a customer owed by chalking it on a up your sleeve of a strategy, idea, or
tablet made of slate. !
resource kept secret and in reserve for usewipe the slate clean: see WIPE. when needed. 
wear your heart on your sleeve: see HEART. 
sledgehammer sleigh ride
take or use a sledgehammer to crack a nut take someone for a sleigh ride mislead
use disproportionately forceful means to someone. 
achieve a simple objective. 
Asleighridebere is an implausible orfalse !
Asecgehammerisa large, heavy hammer story or a hoax: if you take someone for a 
used for such jobs as breaking up rocks and sleigh ride you mislead or cheat them. Sleigh 
driving in fence posts. ride can also mean a drug-induced high , so !
take a sleigh ride means take drugs,
1998 New Scientist Fighting tooth decay by especially cocaine. 
annihilating mostly harmless bacteria in your
mouth is like taking a sledgehammer to crack
a nut. sleightsleight of hand the display of skilful,
sleep especially deceptive, dexterity or cunning. 
sleep easy: see EASY. Literally, the expression means manual
sleep like a log or top sleep very soundly. dexterity in performing a conjuring trick. 
the sleep of the just a deep, untroubledsleep. slice
The idea here is that only those with clear a slice of the action: see a piece of the action
consciences can expect to have a peaceful at PIECE. 
night sleep. a slice of the cake a share of the benefits or
sleep rough: see ROUGH. profits, informal
1991 Robert Reiner Chief Constables Perhaps it  
sleep with one eye open sleep very lightly so because they re such good spenders that our
as to be aware of what is happening around slice of the cake is sufficient for all we want. 
you. slide
someone could do something in their sleep
let something slide negligently allow some someone could do or accomplish some thing to deteriorate. thing with no effort or conscious thought. 
informal sling
put someone or have your ass in a sling
sleeping land someone or be in trouble. North
let sleeping dogs lie avoid interfering in a American vulgar slang267 smell
sling beer work as a bartender. North American 1998 Spectator Those of us who feared that
informa evolution would not assuage nationalist
sentiment but turn out to be the slippery slope
sling hash or plates serve food in a cafe or to separatism have a good chance of being
diner. North American informal proved right. 
sling your hook: see K. 
slings and arrows adverse factors or slow
circumstances. slow but or and sure not quick but
achieving the required result eventually. 
This expression is taken from the to be or proverb
not to be speech in Hamlet: Whether tisnobler in the mind to suffer the slings and
arrows of outrageous fortune, Or to takesmack
arms against a sea of troubles, And by have a smack at make an attempt at or attack
opposing end them. on. informal
2001 Ian J. Deary Intelligence The genetic a smack in the face or eye a strong rebuff. 
lottery and the environmental slings and informal
arrows influence the level of some of our
mental capabilities. small
the wee small hours the early hours
slip of the morning immediately after
give someone the slip evade or escape from midnight. 
someone, informal small is beautiful the belief that something
let something slip reveal something small-scale is better than a large-scale
inadvertently in the course of a equivalent. 
conversation. fail to take advantage of
Small is Beautiful is the title of a book by an opportunity. F. Schumacher, published in 1973. The
let something slip through your fingers or phrase is best known through its adoption as grasp lose hold or possession of a slogan by environmentalists. 
something. miss the opportunity ofgaining something. small potatoes something insignificant or
0 1 2 5 W. Somerset Maugham Of Human unimportant. 
Bondage He was mad to have let such an This phrase originated in mid 19th adventure slip through his fingers. century American use, especially in the form !
a slip of a — a young, small, and slim ! small potatoes and few in the hill. 
person. 
1980 Philip Larkin Letter After all you are a very 2002 Science Turner calls this budget a start but
says it small potatoes compared to what
young 51! Hardly 51 at all! A slip of a thing! will be needed to get fuel cell cars to market. 
slip of the pen or the tongue a minor
mistake in writing or speech. smart 
The equivalent Latin phrases, lapsus look smart be quick, chiefly British
calami and lapsus linguae, are also sometimes used in formal English. smell
live or survive on the smell of an oil rag liveslip on a banana skin make a silly and
in conditions of extreme want. Australian
embarrassing mistake. 
smell blood discern weakness or vulnera there many a slip twixt cup and lip
bility in an opponent. many things can go wrong between the
start of something and its completion; smell of the lamp show signs of laborious
nothing is certain until it has happened. study and effort. 
proverb The lamp here is an oil lamp, formerly
used for night-time work or study. slippery
slippery slope an idea or course of smell a rat begin to suspect trickery or
action which will lead inevitably to deception, informal
something unacceptable, wrong, or smell the roses enjoy or appreciate what is
disastrous. often ignored. North American informal
smelling 268involving the US President Richard Nixon. 
smelling When one of the Watergate tapes revealed
come up or out smelling of roses or Nixon wish to limit the FBI role in the
violets make a lucky escape from a investigation, Barber B. Conable famously
difficult situation with your reputation commented: guess we have found the
intact, informal smoking pistol, haven we? 

The fuller form of this expression, fall in 1998 New Scientist This genetic smoking gun is
the shit and come up smelling of roses, evidence of a migration out of Asia that is hard
explains the idea behind it. to refute. smooth
smiling in smooth water in quiet and serene cir come up smiling recover from adversity and
cumstances, especially after difficulties. cheerfully face the future, informal
1989 Woman Realm But despite her ordeal smooth someone ruffled feathers: see
courageous Kelly has come up smiling and is RUFFLED. 
now looking forward to a bright future. 
snake
smoke a snake in the grass a treacherous or
go up in smoke Qbe destroyed by fire, of deceitful person. 
a plan come to nothing, informal Since the late 17th century this expression no smoke without fire or where there has entirely superseded the earlier idiom a
pad in the straw. Pad is an old dialect term for ;
smoke there fire there always some
a toad, an animal that was formerly thought jreason for a rumour, proverb to be poisonous. 
1998 Times This is not saying that there is no
smoke withoutfire—whichsentiment
underlines why bogus claims can do so much snaky
irrevocable damage—but that this is always, go or drive someone snaky lose or cause
necessarily, going to be an incendiary issue. 
someone to lose their self-control. Canadian
smoke and mirrors the obscuring or
embellishing of the truth of a situation snap
with misleading or irrelevant information. bite someone head off: see HEAD. 
chiefly North American
1998 Sunday Telegraph Ministers accused in a snap in a moment; almost immediately. 
the Conservatives of a smoke and mirrors informal, chiefly North American
con trick. snap your fingers at: see F G R. 
smoke like a chimney smoke tobaccoincessantly. snappy
make it snappy be quick about it. 
watch someone smoke observe another1994 Pete Hamill A Drinking Life Into bed! he
person activity. 
said. Make it snappy! retreated into the
The implication of this phrase is that the darkness of the second floor from the kitchen. 
activity in question will be so fast and furious that smoke will be generated. sneezed
1947 P. G. Wodehouse Full Moon Look at Henry not to be sneezed at not to be rejected
the Eighth... And Solomon. Once they started without careful consideration; worth
marrying, there was no holding them—you having or taking into account, informal
ust sat back and watched their smoke. 
snook
smoking cock a snook openly show contempt or a lack
a smoking gun or pistol a piece of of respect for someone or something. 
incontrovertible evidence. informal, chiefly British

This phrase draws on the assumption, a Literally, if you cock a snook, you place
staple of detective fiction, that the person your hand so that your thumb touches your
found with a recently fired gun must be the nose and your fingers are spread out, in order ;
guilty party. The use of the phrase in the late : to express contempt. Recorded from the late ;
20th century was particularly associated with 18th century, the expression origins are
the Watergate scandal in the early 1970s uncertain—as are those of the gesture itself, 269 song
which occurs under a variety of names and in many countries, the earliest definite mention jsoda
of it being by Rabelais in 1532. from soda to hock from beginning to end. 
datedIn the card game faro, the 5oda is the
snow exposed top card at the beginning of a deal, pure as the driven snow: see PURE. while the hock is the last card remaining in
the box after all the others have been dealt. snowball
not a snowball chance in hell: see not ahope in hell at HELL. soft
have a soft spot for be fond of or affectionatesnuff towards. 
up to snuff up to the required standard,in good health, informal soldier
come or play the old soldier use your
snug greater age or experience of life to deceive
snug as a bug in a rug extremely someone or to shirk a duty, informal
comfortable, humorous nautical slang a soldier or an old
soldier was an incompetent seaman. 
soap
no soap no chance of something happening soldier of fortune an adventurous person
or occurring. North American informal ready to take service under any person or
state in return for money; a mercenary. 
The origin of this expression, used to
refuse a request, may lie in the mid 19th- some
century US informal use of soap to mean money. and then some and plenty more than that. 
informal, chiefly US
1929 Edmund Wilson Thought of Daisy If he 1998 New Scientist But by simply sitting still
tries to cut in on you, don letum—I ll just and digesting, a chick could double this rate
tellum, no soap. and then some. sober something
sober as a judge completely sober. thirty-something or forty-something, etc. 
an unspecified age between thirty andsock forty forty and fifty, etc.. informal
knock or blow someone socks off amazeor impress someone, informal son
1991 Barbara Anderson Girls High Years ago son of a gun a humorous or affectionate way
she saw a Hockney... the few lines which of addressing or referring to someone. 
sketched the owlish face knocked her socks off. informal
knock the socks off someone beat or surpass The term arose with reference to the guns someone, informal carried on board ships: it is said to have been originally applied to babies born at sea by
pull your socks up make an effort to improve women accompanying their husbands. 
your work, performance, or behaviour. informal
put a sock in it stop talking. British informal song
for a song very cheaply, informalsock it to someone attack someone
vigorously or make a forceful impression The ultimate origin of this phrase is
probably the practice, in former times, of
on them in some other way. informal
selling written copies of ballads very cheaply 1991 Baseball Today Chicago socked it to the affairs. The expression was in common use by other teams in the American league. the mid 17th century. 
— your socks off do something with great
energy or enthusiasm, informal 1985 Nini Herman My Kieinian Home The
1996 Premiere Ray Liotta strikes perfect notes place was going for a song, since anyone
as Hill while Joe Pesci blows your socks off as in his right mind would have steered well
sociopathic side-kick Tommy. clear of it. sop 270
on song performing well; in good form. British out of sorts slightly unwell. in low
informal spirits; irritable. 
1996 Times The horse is in pretty good shape. sort the men from the boys: see separate the
rode him out at Haydock and he felt on song. men from the boys at MAN. 
song and dance a fuss or commotion. 
informal a long explanation that is pointless soul
or deliberately evasive. North American informal the life and soul of the party: see LIFE. 
a lost soul Qa soul that is damned. asop
person who seems unable to cope with
a sop to Cerberus something offered to
appease someone. everyday life. 
sell your soul: see SELL. Greek mythology, Cerberus was the
three-headed watchdog which guarded the work the soul case out of put someone
entrance of Hades. In the Aeneid Virgil under severe stress. 
describes how the Sibyl guiding Aeneas to
the underworld threw a drugged cake to
soup
Cerberus, thus enabling the hero to pass the from soup to nuts from beginning to end;
monster in safety. completely. North American informal
Soup is likely to feature as the first course ! of a formal meal, while a selection of nuts
sorcerer may be offered as the final one. 
sorcerer apprentice a person who
having instigated a process is unable to in the soup trouble, informal
control it. 
This is a translation of the French sour
l apprenti sorcier, the title of an 1897 sour grapes an attitude in which
symphonic poem by Pau ukas based on der someone disparages or pretends to despise
Zauberlehrling, a 1797 ballad by Goethe. In something because they cannot have it
this ballad the apprentice use of magic
themselves. spells sets in motion a series of events which he cannot control. Aesop fable The Fox and the Grapes, 
the fox, unable to reach the tempting bunch of grapes, comforts himself with the thought Isore that they were probably sour anyway. 
stand or stick out like a sore thumb be very
1998 New Scientist At 66,1 can be acquittedobviously different from the surrounding
of any sour grapes, but feel sorry for
people or things. younger MPs... who have all been passed
over. sorrow
more in sorrow than in anger with regret or south
sadness rather than with anger. down south to or in the south of a country. 
This is taken from Hamlet. When Hamlet informal
asks Horatio to describe the expression on the 1995 Bill Bryson Notes from a Small Island Ah,
face of his father ghost, Horatio replies a you re the chap from down south, he said,
countenance more in sorrow than in anger. remembering, which threw me a little. It isn t
often you hear Yorkshire referred to as down
south. sortit takes all sorts people vary greatly in SOW
character, tastes, and abilities, proverb have the right sow by the ear have the
The complete form of this expression is it correct understanding of a situation. 
takes all sorts to make a world, often used as a make a silk purse out of a sow ear: see
comment on what the speaker feels to be SILK. 
unconventional behaviour. sow the seed or seeds of do something
1999 David Mitchell Ghostwritten We re a chat which will eventually bring about a
show. It takes all sorts. You complain when particular result. 
they re too dull. You complain when they re 1991 Philip Slater A Dream Deferred Each
too colourful. authoritarian government, groping toward
271 speak
modernization, would thereby sow the seeds works, a monkey wrench being a spanner or of its own destruction. wrench with adjustable jaws: to throw a
spanner. or a monkey wrench into the works 
space is to deliberately wreck someone plans or
activities. In his 1974 novel The Monkey
watch th is space used to indicate that further Wrench Gang, Edward Abbey used this as a
developments are expected and more metaphor for systematic industrial sabotage, information will be given later, informal and monkey-wrenching is now a colloquial
term for such activity. 
The space referred to here is a section of a !
newspaper available for a specific purpose, 1997 Spectator Pretty well all the
especially for advertising. newspapers... are now adversarial in tone,
conceiving their basic purpose as throwing
1979 Julian Rathbone The Euro-Killers Where is spanners in the works almost as a matter of
he? Watch this space for exciting revelations principle. 
in the next few days. spade sparego spare become extremely angry or
call a spade a spade speak plainly or bluntly,distraught. British informal
without avoiding issues which are
1991 Roddy Doyle The Van Remind me tounpleasant or embarrassing. 
replace this one... Veronica ll go spare if she
A variation on this phrase, dating from goes to get it on Sunday and it not there.
the early 20th century and used for humorous spare someone blushes: see BLUSH.
emphasis, is call a spade a shovel.
to spare left over.
1998 Spectator A man whom might not agree
with where politics are concerned, but one spark
who calls a spade a spade. sparks fly a discussion becomes heated or
in spades to a very high degree; as much as or lively.
more than could be desired, informal
strike sparks off each other or one another 
This expression derives from the fact that of two or more people creatively
spades are the highest-ranking suit in the inspire each other while working on
card game bridge. something.
1996 Time Out Wit, vitality, heart, story-telling
flair: the movie has each in spades. speakit speaks well for something places
Spanish someone or something in a favourable
old Spanish customs or practices long- light.
standing though unauthorized or irregular speak for yourself give your own opinions.
work practices. The exclamation speak for yourself !
This expression has been in use in printing indicates to someone that an opinion they
circles since the 1960s; it is often used have expressed is not shared by yourself and : humorously to refer to practices in the British : is resented.
newspaper printing houses in Fleet Street,
London, formerly notorious for their speak in tongues speak in an unknown
inefficiency. The reason for describing such language during religious worship.
practices as Spanish is not known.
Speaking in or with tongues is a
1998 Spectator Outsourcing can do much for phenomenon known more formally as
flexibility and more for costs and it is a proven glossolalia, which is regarded by some as a
cure for quaint old Spanish customs. gift of the Holy Spirit. The Bible records that the apostles demonstrated this ability e.g.
spanner Acts 10:46, 19:6, and it is a component of
present-day charismatic Christian worship.
a spanner in the works an event, person,
or thing that prevents the smooth or speak your mind express your feelings or
successful implementation of a plan; a opinions frankly.
drawback or impediment. 1982 Marion Z. Bradley The Mists ofAvalon
Someday she would be too weary or too
A variant, found chiefly in North
unguarded to care, and she would speak her
American English, is a monkey wrench in the 
mind to the priest.spec 272speak of the devil: see DEVIL. spill
speak volumes 0ofa gesture, circumstance,
spill the beans reveal secret information,
or object convey a great deal, be good
especially unintentionally or indiscreetly.evidence for. informal
01998 New Scientist It was a minor scandal...
but it spoke volumes about the world shifting spill your guts reveal copious information to
relationship with its favourite illicit drug. someone in an uninhibited way. informal
speak as you find base your opinion of spin
someone or something purely on
personal experience. spin your wheels: see WHEEL.
1988 Hilary Mantel Eight Months on Ghazzah spin a yarn: see YARN.
Street Look, don have any theories. just go
issue by issue. just speak as find. spirit
enter into the spirit join wholeheartedly in
spec an event.
on spec in the hope of success but without 1994 Jonathan Coe What a Carve Up! His
any specific plan or instructions, informal sarcasm was mischievous rather than icy, so
tried to enter into the spirit.
The informal abbreviation of speculation 
to spec was originally American, but it has the spirit is willing but the flesh is weak
been used in British English since the early someone has good intentions but yields to
19th century, and the phrase on spec itself temptation and fails to live up to them.
dates from the mid 19th century.
This expression quotes Jesus words in
2000 Times As large sculpture is commis- Matthew 26:41, on finding his disciples
sioned before being produced, Barbara asleep in the Garden of Gethsemane despite routine became the opposite of Ben  , his instructions that they should stay awake.
whose work was produced on spec.the spirit moves someone someone feels
spectre inclined to do something.
a spectre at the feast: see a ghost at the feast
at FEAST. This was a phrase originally used by
Quakers, with reference to the inspiration of jspeed the Holy Spirit.
up to speed operating at full speed, of
a person or company performing at an spitanticipated rate or level. of a person
be the spit or the dead spit of look exactly
fully informed or up to date, informal
01998 Times Magazine Penati advises on menus like, informal
and drops in occasionally to check that The full form of the phrase is be the spit everything is up to speed. 1998 New Scientist and image of, perhaps coming from the idea It well known to anyone who is up to speed of a person apparently being formed from
with e-mail. the spit of another, so great is the similarity !
between them. This fuller form also lies
spell behind the expression spitting image.under someone spell so devoted to
someone that they seem to have magic spit and polish extreme neatness or
power over you. smartness.spit and sawdust of a pub old-fashioned,
spend run-down, or dirty. British informalspend a penny: see PENNY.
Until the mid 20th century, the general
spike Ibar of a pub would often have sawdust
sprinkled on the floor, on to which the
spike someone guns take steps to thwart customers could spit.
someone intended course of action.
spit blood be very angry.O F recorded in English in the late 17th
century, the expression referred literally to spit out the dummy behave in a petulant
the practice of hammering a metal spike into way. Australian informal
a captured enemy cannon so that it could not spit in the eye or face of show contempt orbe fired.scorn for.273 spur
spitting This phrase alludes to the former practice of making spoonsout of the horns of cattle or spitting in or into the wind a futile or
sheep.pointless activity.
1996 Daily Telegraph Both the Church win the wooden spoon be the least
report and the atheist professor are spitting successful contestant; win the booby
in the wind, of course, because theprize.incoming tide of superstition has a long way
to rise yet. A wooden spoon was originally presented tothecandidatecominglastintheCambridge splash University mathematical tripos the final
make a splash attract a great deal of honours examination for a BA degree.
attention.
1996 Amitav Ghosh The Calcutta Chromosome
This was just about the time that new sciences sport
like bacteriology and parasitology were the sport of kings horse racing.
beginning to make a splash in Europe.sporting
split a sporting chance some possibility of
split hairs: see HAIR. success.
split your sides be convulsed with laughter.spotinformala blind spot: see BLIND.
split the ticket or your vote vote for hit the spot be exactly what is required.
candidates of more than one party. US informal
split the vote of a candidate or minority knock spots off: see KNOCK.
party attract votes from another candidate put someone on the spot force someone
or party with the result that both are into a situation in which they must make a
defeated by a third. British difficult decision or answer a difficult
spoil question, informal
too many cooks spoil the broth: see COOK.
spoutspoilt up the spout no longer working or likelyto be useful or successful. of a woman
be spoilt for choice have so many attractive
pregnant. British informal
possibilities to choose from that it is
difficult to make a selection. Britishsprat
a sprat to catch a mackerel a small
spoke expenditure made, or a small risk taken, in
put a spoke in someone wheel prevent
the hope of a large or significant gain. British
someone from carrying out a plan. British
Asprat is a small sea fish, while a mackerel It is not clear why a spoke, a normal is rather larger. The phrase has been in use
component of many wheels, should have since the mid 19th century and is also found such a negative effect. It has been suggested with whale in the place of mackerel.that spoke here is a mistranslation of the
Dutch word spaak, meaning a bar or a
stave , which is found in the identica utch spreadidiom.
spread like wildfire: see F. spread yourself too thin be involved in so
sponge many different activities or projects that
throw in the sponge: see THROW. your time and energy are not used to goodeffect.
spoon spread your wings: see WING.
greasy spoon: see GREASY.make a spoon or spoil a horn make a spur
determined effort to achieve something, on the spur of the moment on a momentary
whatever the cost. impulse; without premeditation.square 274
1988 Rodney Hall Kisses of the Enemy Now that form shut the stable door after the steed is
was a witticism, an inspiration on the spur of stolen.
the moment.
win your spurs: see .stage
square hold the stage dominate a scene of action or
forum of debate.
back to square one: see BACK. set the stage for prepare the conditions for
get square with pay a creditor. the occurrence or beginning of something.
have square eyes habitually watch 1998 High Country News Udall had ruffled
television to excess. uniforms, but he had also set the stage for the
on the square honest; straightforward, glory years of the agency.
having membership of the Freemasons.
01997 Guardian One non-Masonic stair rod
officer... claims he was moved sideways... rain stair rods: see rain cats and dogs at RAIN.
and subsequently he discovered that the
corrupt officers and the commander were all stake
on the square. go to the stake for do anything to defend a
square accounts with: see settle accounts specified belief, opinion, or person.
with at ACCOUNT. In the past, especially during times of
square the circle do something that is religious persecution, heretics were liable to be tied to a wooden stake and burned alive if considered to be impossible.they refused to recant their beliefs.
0 In its literal sense, square the circle means construct a square equal in area to a given pull up stakes of a person move or go to live
circle. Since this problem is incapable of a elsewhere. North American
purely geometrical solution, the phrase has
developed a more general application and is re stakes are the pegs or posts which
used to refer to an attempt to do something secure a tent or which are put up as a palisade !
impossible. around a temporary settlement.
2000 Anthony Bourdain Kitchen Confidential
squeeze Steven... has chosen to leave New York for
Florida with his girlfriend, pulling up stakes,
put the squeeze on someone coerce or giving up his apartment, even bringing along
pressurize someone, informal his goldfish.
1993 Jonathon Green It Sex Since the Sixties One
day two characters walked into my studio and stake a claim declare your right to some tried to put the squeeze on me for protection thing.
money. This expression refers to the practice of
squeeze someone until the pips squeak: see ! putting stakes around the perimeter of a
PIP. piece of land to which a claim is laid. It is
American in origin, dating from the
squib California gold rush of 1849, when the
a damp squib: see DAMP. prospectors registered their claims to
individual plots of land in this way.stab
a stab in the dark: see a shot in the dark at stall
DARK. set out your stall: see SET.
a stab in the back a treacherous act or
statement; a betrayal. standstand someone in good stead: see STEAD.
stable stand on your own two feet be or become
shut or lock the stable door after the horse self-reliant or independent.
has bolted try to avoid or prevent some-stand out like a sore thumb: see SORE.
thing bad or unwelcome when it is already
too late to do so. proverb stand out a mile: see MILE.stand pat: see PAT.
This saying dates back to medieval times, stand up and be counted state publicly
Until the late 19th century it was used in the your support for someone or something.
275 steal
will the real — please stand up used state of play the score at a particular time
rhetorically to indicate that the in a cricket or football match. the
specified person should clarify their current situation in an ongoing process,
position or reveal their true character. especially one involving opposing or
informal competing parties. British
1996 Maclean There have been moments
when wanted to ask, Would the real Mr. stay
Arafat please stand up , but these have been
fleeting. stay loose: see hang loose at LOOSE.
stay the course or distance hold out to
standing the end of a race or contest, pursue a
leave someone or something standing of a difficult task or activity to the end.
person or thing be much better or faster stay your hand: see HAND.
than someone or something else. a stay of execution a delay in carrying out a
court order.
stands stay put of a person or object remain
it stands to reason: see REASON. somewhere without moving or beingmoved.
star 1994 Sunday Times Despite firm intentions to
have stars in your eyes be idealistically explore, campers tend to stay put, especially if
hopeful or enthusiastic, especially about a there are lots of activities and a good pool.
possible future in entertainment or sport.
reach for the stars have high or ambitious stead
aims. stand someone in good stead of something
see stars see flashes of light, especially as a learned or acquired be advantageous or
result of being hit on the head. useful to someone over time or in the
someone star is rising someone is future.
becoming ever more successful or popular.steady
starch go steady have a regular romantic or sexual
take the starch out of someone shake relationship with a particular person.
someone confidence, especially by informal
humiliating them. US 1905 Edith Wharton The House of Mirth thought we were to be married: he gone
steady with me six months and given me his
staring mother wedding ring.
be staring someone in the face of a fact or
steady as she goes keep on with the same
object be glaringly apparent or obvious.
careful progress, informal
be staring something in the face of a
person be on the verge of defeat, death, or In nautical vocabulary, steady is the
ruin. instruction given to the helmsman to keep
the ship on the same course. 
start 1998 Bookseller His boss set him one task:
start a hare: see HARE. steady as she goes, but more so. starter steal
under starter orders of horses, runners, or steal someone blind rob or cheat someone in
other competitors ready to start a race on a comprehensive or merciless way. informal
receiving the signal from the starter.
steal someone clothes appropriate
state someone ideas or policies. British informal
state of the art the most recent stage in the steal a march on gain an advantage over
development of a product, incorporating someone, typically by acting before they
the newest ideas and the most up-to-date do.
features. steal the show attract the most attention
state of grace a condition of being free from and praise.
sin. steal someone thunder win praise for
steam 276
yourself by pre-empting someone else step out of line behave inappropriately or
attempt to impress. disobediently.
The critic and playwright John Dennis step on someone toes: see tread on
1657-1734 invented a new method of someone toes at TREAD.
simulating the sound of thunder in the
theatre, which he employed in his sterner
unsuccessful play Appius and Virginia.
be made of sterner stuff of a person have a
Shortly after his play had finished its brief
run, Dennis attended a performance of stronger character and be more able to
Macbeth in which the improved thunder overcome problems than others.
effect was used, and he is reported to have
exclaimed in a fury: Damn them! They will This expression comes from Shakespeare  
not let my play run, but they steal my ulius Caesar. When that the poor have cried,
thunder. Caesar hath wept; Ambition should be made
of sterner stuff: Yet Brutus says he wasambitious; And Brutus is an honourableman. !
steam
get up or pick up steam generate enough 1998 Spectator Unlike the Americans, who are
pressure to drive a steam engine, of a inclined to pull all their personnel out of a
project, plan, or process in its early stages country at the first hint of trouble, the
gradually gain more impetus and driving British foreign service is made of sterner
stuff.force.have steam coming out of your ears beextremely angry or irritated, informal
stewstew in your own juice suffer the unpleasant
let or blow off steam get rid of pent-up consequences of your own actions or
energy or emotion, informal temperament without the consoling
The image here is of the release of excess intervention of others, informal
steam from a steam engine through a valve.
stick
run out of or lose steam lose impetus orin the sticks in a remote rural area, informal
enthusiasm, informal
1992 Jeff Torrington Swing Hammer Swing! stick out like a sore thumb: see stand out like
Eventually ran out of steam and came to a a sore thumb at SORE.
halt.stick out a mile: see stand out a mile at
under your own steam without assistance MILE.
from others. stick at nothing allow nothing to deter you
1996 Colin Bateman Of Wee Sweetie Mice & Men from achieving your aim, even if it means
She was starting to move under her own
steam, hesitant Bambi steps which weren acting wrongly or dishonestly.
helped by being hurried along, but a good sign stick your bib in: see BIB.
nevertheless. stick your chin out show firmness or
steer fortitude.steer a middle course: see MIDDLE. stick in your craw: see CRAW.
stick in your gizzard: see GIZZARD.
stem stick in your throat: see THROAT.
from stem to stern from the front to the stick it on make high charges, tell an
back, especially of a ship.exaggerated story, informal
step stick it to someone treat someone harshly or
mind or watch your step be careful. severely, informal, chiefly US
step into the breach: see BREACH. stick your neck out risk incurring criticism,
step on it make a motor vehicle go faster anger, or danger by acting or speaking
by pressing down on the accelerator pedal boldly, informal
with your foot, hurry up. informal 1969 Bessie Head When Rain Clouds Gather
Things are so bad that if anyone sticks his neck
A US variant of this expression is step on out for a refugee, he not likely to get
the gas. promoted forfiveyears.stick your oar in: see OAR.277 stomach
stick one or it on someone hit someone. Stump has been used as an informal term ;
informal for leg since the 15th century; the
expression itself dates from the mid 16th
a stick to beat someone or something with a
century.fact or argument held over someone orsomething as a threat or an advantage.
stick to someone fingers of money be stitch
embezzled by a person, informal a stitch in time if you sort out a problem
stick to your guns: see GUN. immediately, it may save a lot of extra worklater, proverb
stick to your ribs of food be very filling.
up sticks go to live elsewhere. British informal The fuller form of the expression is a stitch in time saves nine. Nine here has no particular significance as a number but was chosensticky because of its similarity in sound with the
sticky fingers a propensity to steal, informal word time.
a sticky wicket: see WICKET.
in stitches laughing uncontrollably, informalstiff Stitch, in the sense of a sudden localized a stiff upper lip a quality of uncomplaining :abbing pain , such as might be caused by a
stoicism. needle, is recorded in Old English. It is now
generally used of a muscle spasm in the side ;
This is a characteristic particularly caused especially by exertion. Shakespeare
associated with the British but the phrase is seems to have been the first to describe
apparently North American in origin, dating stitches brought on by laughter; in Twelfth
back to the mid 19th century. It is used, for Night 1601 Maria invites her fellow
example, in Harriet Beecher Stowe novel conspirators to observe the lovelorn Malvolio Uncle Tom Cabin, published in 1852. with the words: If you. ..will laugh
yourselves into stitches, follow me. 1998 Spectator The Princess... as herfinalgift
to the British people, had unstarched their 1981 D. M. Thomas The White Hotel She had
stiff upper lips. them in stitches with her absurd—but true—
anecdotes.still
still small voice the voice of your conscience. stockon the stocks in construction or preparation.
In 1 Kings 19:12, the voice of God is
described as a still small voice. During construction, a ship is supported
on a frame orscaffolding known asthestoccs. still waters run deep a quiet or placid
manner may conceal a passionate nature. put or take stock in believe or have faith in.
proverbThe earliest example so far recorded ofthis expression is by Mark Twain in Galaxy
sting 1870: The "chance" theory... ...
sting in the tail an unpleasant or problematic calculated to inflict... pecuniary loss upon
end to something. any community that takes stock in it. 1992 Ronald Wright Stolen Continents At last
Hendrick came to the sting in the tail of his take stock Qmake an inventory of the
speech. merchandise in a shop review or make
an assessment of a particular situation,
stink typically as a prelude to making adecision.
like stink extremely hard or intensely, informal
2000 Steven Heighten The Shadow Boxer Let stomach
him tire out a bit and then go to work on him
upstairs. Jabs and straight rights now, got it? an army marches on its stomach soldiers or
Go on. Get on him like stink. workers can only fight or function
effectively if they have been well fed.
stir The saying has been attributed to both
stir a finger: see lift a finger at LIFT. Frederick the Great and Napoleon I. It is a
version of the French phrase est la soupe qui 
stir your stumps of a person begin to move fait la soldat.
or act. British informal, dated
stompie 278
on a full or an empty stomach having or This phrase comes from the proverb
without having eaten beforehand. between two stools one falls to the ground,
first referred to in English by the medieval
a strong stomach an ability to see or do
writer John Gower in Confessio Amantis
unpleasant things without feeling sick or c.1390.
squeamish.stompie stop
pick up stompies break into a conversation pull out all the stops make a very great
of which you have heard only the end. South effort; go to elaborate lengths.
African The stops referred to here are those of
ln
Afrikaans, a stompie is a cigarette butt, an organ. Although this is an early 20th century expression, Matthew Arnold, in
the Preface to Essays in Criticism 1865
refers to an attempt on his behalf to pull out stone a few more stops in that... somewhat
be carved or set or written in stone be narrow-toned organ, the modern
fixed and unchangeable. Englishman .O The reference here is to the biblical Ten
Commandments, written on tablets of stone stop at nothing recognize no obstacles or
by God and handed down to Moses on Mount reasons for not doing something; be utterly
Sinai Genesis 31:18. ruthless or determined.
1991 Time Seen simplistically andfromafar,
cast or throw the first stone be the first to Saddam Hussein comes across as... the villain
accuse or criticize. who will stop at nothing.O The phrase comes from an incident
stop your ears put yourfingersin your
recorded in St John Gospel. A group of men ears to avoid hearing. refuse to listen.
preparing to stone an adulterous womanstop a gap serve to meet a temporary need.
to death were addressed by Jesus with
the words: He that is without sin among stop someone mouth bribe or otherwise
you, let him first cast a stone at her induce a person to keep silent about
John 8:7.something.
have kissed the blarney stone: see stop the show of a performer provoke
BLARNEY. prolonged applause or laughter, causing an
leave no stone unturned try every possible interruption.
course of action in order to achieve stopper
something. put a or the stopper on cause something to
mark something with a white stone: see end or become quiet.WHITE.
a stone throw a short distance. store
1989 Joanna Trollope Village Affairs Can tell set or lay or put store by or on consider
you the difference it will make, having you a something to be of a particular degree of
stone throw away. importance or value.stony storm
fall on stony ground of words or a sugges- go down a storm be enthusiastically
tion be ignored or badly received. received by an audience.
The reference here istothe parable of the the lull or calm before the storm a period of
sower recounted in both St Mark and St unusual tranquillity or stability that seems
Matthew Gospels, in which some of the seed likely to presage difficult times.
scattered by the sower fell on stony places
where it withered away. a storm in a teacup great excitement or
anger about a trivial matter.
stool A North American variant of thisexpression is a tempest in a teapot.
fall between two stools fail to be or to
take one of two satisfactory alternatives. 1998 Times A storm in a teacup? Who cares
British about a bunch of seeds?279 straw
take something by storm capture a place strainby a sudden and violent attack. have
strain at a gnat make a difficulty about
great and rapid success in a particular place
accepting something trivial, literary
or with a particular group of people.
1998 Times Round-up Ready soya has taken The phrase derives from Matthew 23:24,
America by storm. Ye blind guides, which strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel. The word strain here
— up a storm perform a particular action appears to mean make a violent effort , but
with great enthusiasm and energy, chiefly it may in fact refer to the straining of a liquid
North American to remove unwanted particles: the image is of
1990 Harper Magazine What fear is that we j a person quietly accepting a difficulty or
talk up a storm and never better the situation problem of significant proportions while
for the exploited or the poor. baulking at something comparatively trivial.
story strain at the leash be eager to begin or do
something.end of story: see END.strain every nerve: see NERVE.
it or that the story of my life used to
lament the fact that a particular mis-fortune has happened too often in yourstrange
make strange of a baby or child fuss or beexperience, informalshy in company. Canadian
to cut or make a long story short used to 1987 Alice Munro The Progress ofLove Her timid end an account of events quickly. looking fat son... usually liked Violet, but
today he made strange.stouta stout heart courage or determination. straw
literary clutch or grasp orcatch at straws do, say, or
believe anything, however unlikely or
stove inadequate, which seems to offer hope in a
slave over a hot stove work very hard desperate situation.
preparing a meal, informal This expression comes from the proverb a
drowning man wil utch at a straw, which is
straight recorded in various forms since the mid 16th
keep a straight face manage to not show any century. facial expression, even though you aredraw the short straw be the unluckiest of aamused.
group of people, especially in being chosen
the straight and narrow morally correct to perform an unpleasant task.
behaviour.O method of drawing lots involves
The full form of the expression is the holding several straws of varying lengths
straight and narrow path or way. It with one end concealed in your hand and
developed from a misunderstanding of then inviting other members of the group to Matthew 7:14, strait is the gate, and narrow take one each.
is the way, which leadeth unto life , where
strait is in fact being used as another word forthe last or final straw a farther difficulty or
narrow. annoyance, typically minor in itself butcoming on top of a whole series of
a straight arrow: see ARROW.
difficulties, that makes a situation
straight as a die: see DIE. unbearable.a straight fight a contest between just
The full version of this is the proverb the itwo opponents, especially in an election.
last straw breaks the camel back. TheBritish
modern form is traceable to Charles Dickens !
straight from the shoulder of a blow well in Dombey and Son 1848, but earlier
delivered. @of a verbal attack frank or versions are recorded, including a mid 17th direct. century reference to the last feather breaking a horse back.
straight off or out without hesitation or
deliberation, informal a straw in the wind a slight but significant
straight up truthfully; honestly, informal hint of future developments.streak 280
straws in your hair a state of insanity. has a reputation as an outspoken critic of
China.ln
"former times, the floors of mentalstretch your legs go for a short walk,
institutions were covered with straw, and so having straw in the hair came to be regarded typically after sitting in one place for some
as a characteristic of a deranged person. time.stretch a point allow or do something not
streak usually acceptable, typically as a result of
like a streak of lightning very fast, informal particular circumstances.
1998 Penelope Lively Spiderweb seem to recall
that you are agnostic, but would suggest,
stream with all respect, that you stretch a point and
against or with the stream against or with attend Sunday Matins, at least on occasion.
the prevailing view or tendency. stretch your wings: see WING.
on stream in or into operation or existence;available. stricken
stricken in years used euphemistically to
street describe someone old and feeble.
not in the same street far inferior in terms ofability. British informal stride
streets ahead greatly superior. British informal take something in your stride deal with
1991 Alistair Campbell Sidewinder He has his something difficult or unpleasant in a calm
shortcomings, sure, but he streets ahead of and competent way.Dr Nada.
up or right up your street well suited to strike
your tastes, interests, or abilities, informal strike at the root of: see ROOT.
A North American variant of this strike it rich find a source of abundance or
expression is up your alley. success, informal
strike lucky or strike it lucky have a lucky
success. Britishstrength
go from strength to strength develop or strike oil attain prosperity or success.
progress with increasing success. 1994 Nature S. P. Goldman... seems to have
struck oil in the search for better ways of
a tower or pillar of strength a person who computing electronic states.
can be relied upon to be a source of strongstrike while the iron is hot make use of an
support and comfort.opportunity immediately.
This phrase may come from the Book of
Common Prayer: 0 Lord ... be unto them a Iron can only be hammered into shape at tower of strength. a blacksmith forge while it is hot.
strengthen striking
strengthen someone hand or hands within striking distance: see DISTANCE.
enable or encourage a person to act more
vigorously or effectively. string
have a second string to your bow have an
stretch alternative resource that you can make use
at full stretch with a part of your body fully of if the first one fails. British
extended, using the maximum amount This is a metaphor from archery; related
of your resources or energy. expressions include have several strings to
at a stretch in one continuous period, your bow and add another string to your
with much effort or difficulty. bow. Second string can also be used on its
own to mean simply an alternative resource by no or not by any stretch of the or course of action. imagination used to emphasize that
something is definitely not the case. how long is a piece of string? used as a
1996 New Statesman Though it is by no stretch rejoinder to indicate that it is
of the imagination a political paper, its owner unreasonable for someone to expect the
281 sufferspeaker to be more precise about some- stuck
thing, informal get stuck in or into start doing something
no strings attached no special conditions or enthusiastically or with determination.
restrictions apply to an opportunity or British informaloffer, informal
on a string under your control or influence. studyin a brown study: see BROWN.
The idea here is of a puppeteer
manipulating a puppet by its strings. stuffing
pull strings: see PULL. knock ortake the stuffing out of someone
severely impair someone confidence or
puli the strings: see PULL.
strength, informalstroke stump
different strokes for different folks: see beyond the black stump beyond the limits of
DIFFERENT. settled, and therefore civilized, life.
not or never do a stroke of work do no Australianwork at all.
This phrase comes from the custom of
put someone off their stroke disconcert
using a fire-blackened stump of wood as a
someone so that they do not work or marker when giving directions to travellers.
perform as well as they might; break
the pattern or rhythm of someone on the stump going about the country
work. making political speeches or canvassing.
stroke of genius an outstandingly brilliant chiefly North American

and original idea. rural America in the late 18th century, stroke of luck or good luck a fortunate the stump of a felled tree was often used as
an impromptu platform for someone making occurrence that could not have been a speech.
predicted or expected.
stroke someone or someone hair the up a stump in a situation too difficult for you
to manage. USwrong way irritate a person.strong succeeds
come it strong indulge in exaggeration. British nothing succeeds like success success leads
informal to opportunities for further and greater
successes, proverb
come on strong behave aggressively or
assertively make great efforts or suck
advances, informal suck someone dry exhaust someone  
going strong continuing to be healthy, physical, material, or emotional resources.
vigorous, or successful, informal suck it and see the only way to know if
strong meat ideas or language likely to be something will work or be suitable is to try
found unacceptably forceful or extreme. it. British informalBritish
strong on Ogood at; expert in. possessing sudden
large quantities of; rich in. all of a sudden suddenly.
strut Asa noun sudden is now found only in
strut your stuff dance or behave in a lively, this phrase, but from the mid 16th century to confident way. informal the early 18th century it was in regular use in the sense an unexpected danger or
1998 Country Life London is a place to hide in,
emergency. to get lost in; New York is a stage on which to
strut your stuff.
sufferstubborn not suffer fools gladly be impatient or
stubborn as a mule extremely stubborn. intolerant towards people you regard as
informal unwise or unintelligent.
sugar 282This expression refers to 2 Corinthians11:19: For ye suffer fools gladly, seeing ye
supper
yourselves are wise. sing for your supper earn a benefit or favour
by providing a service in return.2001 Daily Telegraph Such was her expertise as
a Victorianist that her advice was widely This phrase comes from the nursery rhyme sought, though she did not suffer fools gladly. Little Tommy Tucker.
sugarsugar the pill: see PILL. suresure as eggs is eggs also sure as fate
suit without any doubt; absolutely certain.
follow suit: see FOLLOW. sure thing a certainty, certainly; of
men in suits: see MAN. course, informal
suit the action to the word carry out your 2001 Business Week Any potential legal
challenge to Microsoft bundling decisions in
stated intentions at once. XP is no sure thing. 01995 Chitra Banerjee
The expression comes from the scene in Divakaruni Arranged Marriage Would you? Hamlet in which a troupe of actors arrive to said gratefully. That would make me feel so
présenta play to the king and queen. Hamlet much better. ... Sure thing! said Sharmila
instructs them to suit the action to the word, hurriedly as she hung up.
the word to the action .surf
suit someone down to the ground be surf the net move from site to site on the
extremely convenient or appropriate for a Internet.particular person. British
Surf here comes from channel-surfing,
summer the practice of switching frequently between Indian summer: see INDIAN. channels on a television set in an attempt to find an interesting programme.
sun
catch the sun: see CATCH. survival
make hay while the sun shines: see HAY. survival of the fittest the continued
someone sun is set the time of someone existence of organisms which are best
prosperity is over. adapted to their environment, with the
extinction of others, as a concept in the
the sun is over the yardarm it is the time of Darwinian theory of evolution.
day when it is permissible to drink alcohol.
informal The phrase was coined by the English
philosopher and sociologist Herbert Spencer Thiswasoriginallyanauticalexpression:a 1820-1903 in Principles of Biology 1865.
yardarm is the outer extremity of a yard, a Besides its formal scientific use, the phrase is cylindrical spar slung across a ship mast for a oftenusedlooselyandhumorouslyincontexts sail to hang from. The time of day referred to : relating to physical fitness or the lack of it.
is noon, rather than 6 clock in the evening, jas is often supposed.SUSS
1992 Angela Lambert A Rather English Marriage
Have a snifter? Sun over the yardarm, as they on suss on suspicion of having committed a
say in the senior service. crime. British informal
under the sun on earth; existence. Suss is an abbreviation of suspicion,
earlier and more correctly spelled sus. Until its sunny side abolition in 1981, a law nicknamed the sus
sunny side up of a egg fried on one side law allowed the police to arrest a person on !
the suspicion that they were likely to commit jonly. North American
a crime.sunsetride off into the sunset: see RIDE. swallow
one swallow doesn make a summer a
sup single fortunate event does not mean that
sup with the devil: see DEVIL. what follows will also be good, proverb
283 swim1998 Spectator One swallow doesn make a
summer... nor one instance of police sweep
dereliction of duty, incompetence, laziness make a clean sweep: see CLEAN.
and stupidity a complete breakdown in law sweep the board win all the money in a
and order. gambling game; win all possible prizes orrewards.
swathe sweep something under the carpet: see
cut a swathe through pass through some- CARPET.
thing causing great damage, destruction,
or change. sweet
keep someone sweet keep someone well
A swathe was the area cut by a singlesweep of a mower scythe, and so the width disposed towards yourself, especially by
of a strip of grass or corn cut in this way. favours or bribery, informal
she sweet all well. Australian informal
1964 Kylie Tennant Summer Tales Everything
swear O.K.? Yep, said the scrawny man beneath us.
swear blind affirm something in an She sweet 
emphatic manner. British informal sweet Fanny Adams absolutely nothing at
A North American variant of this all. informalexpression is swear up and down.
Fanny Adams was the youthful victim in a
famous murder case in 1867, her body being
swear like a trooper swear a great deal. mutilated and cut to pieces by the killer. With
gruesome black humour, her name came toA trooper was originally a private soldier
be used as a slang term for a type of tinnedin a cavalry unit. Troopers were proverbial for ;
meat or stew recently introduced to the Royal
their coarse behaviour and bad language at
Navy; the current meaning developed early in
least as early as the mid 18th century: in
the 20th century. Sweet Fanny Adams is often
Pamela 1739-40, Samuel Richardson writes
abbreviated in speech to sweet FA, which is
she curses and storms at me like a Trooper ,
understood by many to be a euphemism for
Compare with lie like a trooper at LIE.sweet fuck all.
sweat the sweet spot a particularly fortunate or
by the sweat of your brow by your own hard beneficial circumstance or factor.
work, typically manual labour. : The sweet spot on a tennis racket is the
point believed by players to deliver the
This idiom is often used with reference to maximum power to the ball. In 1997 a
God sentence on Adam after the Fall,
physicist in Australia claimed to have
condemning him to work for his food: In the disproved its existence.
sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread 
Genesis 3:19. 1997 Times Enjoy the sweet spot now, but
don expect a boom.
don sweat it don worry. US
no sweat without any difficulty or problem. sweeten
informal sweeten the pill: see sugar the pill at PILL.
1998 GQ_Give me a date and ll take it, no
sweat. No problem. If available. sweetness
sweat blood make an extraordinarily sweetness and light social or political
strenuous effort to do something, be harmony. a reasonable and peaceable
extremely anxious, informal person.
sweat bullets be extremely anxious or This is a phrase used by Jonathan Swift in nervous. North American informal The Battle of the Books 1704 and taken up sweat it out endure an unpleasant by Matthew Arnold in Culture and Anarchy
experience, typically one involving 1869: The pursuit of perfection, then, is the !
pursuit of sweetness and light .extreme physical exertion in great heat,
wait in a state of extreme anxiety for
something to happen orbe resolved, informal swim
sweat the small stuff worry about trivial swim with the tide: see go with the tide at
things. US TIDE.swing 284
in the swim involved in or aware of current The phrase was originally used with
affairs or events. allusion to an incident in the Garden of
Gethsemane. When the men came to arrest
swing esus, one of his disciples drew his sword and cut off the ear of the servant of the high
get back into the swing of things get used
priest , earning this rebuke from Jesus: all
to or return to being easy and relaxed they that take the sword shall perish with the about an activity or routine you are sword Matthew 26:52. In contemporary
engaged in. informal versions sword is sometimes replaced by gun, 
go with a swing of a party or other event be bomb, etc.lively and enjoyable, informal
put someone to the sword kill someone,
in full swing of an activity proceeding
especially in war.vigorously.
sword of Damocles an imminent danger.swing the lead malinger; shirk your duty.
British informal When the courtier Damocles described
Dionysius I, ruler of Syracuse 405-367 BC, as
This phrase originated in the armed forces ; the happiest of men, Dionysius gave him a
and the lead in question is probably a graphic demonstration of the fragility of his sounding lead, a lump of lead attached to a happiness: he invited Damocles to a banquet,
line and slowly lowered to determine the in the middle of which he looked up to see a
depth of a stretch of water. The connection naked sword suspended over his head by a
between this process and shirking one duty single hair. is not entirely clear.
swings and roundabouts a situation in Sydney
which different actions or options result in Sydney or the bush all or nothing. Australian
no eventual gain or loss. Britishsyllable
This expression comes from the proverbial in words of one syllable using very simple
saying you lose on the swings what you gain 
on the roundabouts.language; expressed plainly.
1994 Canal & Riverboat Bear with me then,
1983 Penelope Lively Perfect Happiness have if use words of one syllable now and
always reckoned on a fair share of that— again, in this series of articles for rivers.
swings and roundabouts, rough with smooth.
sync
swollen in or out of sync working well or badly
have a swollen head be conceited. together; in or out of agreement.

sword Sync orsyncn is an informal abbreviation iof synchronization.
beat or turn swords into ploughshares
devote resources to peaceful rather than 1997 Sunday Times The most serious obstacle is
aggressive or warlike ends. the fact that the British economy cycle is out
of sync with Europe.The reference here is to the biblical image of God peaceful rule: they shall beat theirsystem
swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning hooks Isaiah 2:4. all systems go everything functioning
properly, ready to proceed.
cross swords: see CROSS. get something out of your system get rid of
a double-edged sword: see DOUBLE-EDGED. a preoccupation or anxiety, informal
he who lives by the sword dies by the sword 1988 Erich Sega octors First she let her get
those people who commit violent acts the crying out of her system.
must expect to suffer violence themselves.proverbTt
t a k South African informal
to a or tee exactly; to perfection, informal a piece of old tackie an easy task.
1979 Cape Times Getting the news of the
This origin ofthis idiom, which dates back ;
Zimbabwe Rhodesian ceasefire to the...
to the late 17th century, is uncertain,
guerillas might well make Paul Revere  
Attemptsto link Iwith either a golfer stee orfamous midnight ride look like a piece of old
a builder T-square are unconvincing. It is tackie.
possible that the underlying idea is that of
completing the letter by putting in the cross tread tackie drive or accelerate.
stroke, but the early 17th-century expression 1989 Daily Dispatch By the time they finally
to a tittle was identical in meaning, and it is trod tackie on the road out, a full week had
possible that may be an abbreviation of gone by.tittle.
Tackies are plimsolls. The origin of the
2000 Post Denver He got Ralphie same non- word is uncertain, though there may be a
charismatic charisma down to a T. connection with the English adjective tacky,
meaning slightly sticky , perhaps referring to tab the effect of extreme heat on the plimsolls 
keep tabs or a tab on monitor the activities rubber soles.
or development of; keep under close
observation, informal tag
1978 Mario Puzo Fools Die Jordan knew that tag, rag, and bobtail: see rag, tag, and
Merlyn the Kid kept tabs on everything he did. bobtail at RAG.
pick up the tab pay for something, informal,chiefly North American tail
chase your own tail keep on doing
table something futile, informal
lay something on the table Qmake some- a piece of tail: see a piece of ass at PIECE.
thing known so that it can be freely and the tail wags the dog the less important or
sensibly discussed. postpone something subsidiary factor or thing dominates a
indefinitely, chiefly US situation; the usual roles are reversed.
turn the tables reverse your position relative 1997 Spectator What is wrong is the almost
to someone else, especially by turning a total lack of artistic leadership, the
position of disadvantage into one of administrative tail wagging the dog.
advantage. with your tail between your legs in a state of
dejection or humiliation, informal
Until the mid 18th century, tables was
the usual name for the board game with your tail up in a confident or cheerful
backgammon. Early instances of the use mood, informal
of this phrase, dating from the mid 17th
century, make it clear that it comes from the take
have what it takes have the necessary
practice of turning the board so that a player ;
had to play what had previously been their qualities for success, informal
opponent position.on the take taking bribes, informal
under the table drunk to the point of 1990 Morley Torgov St. Farb Day seen plenty
of cops drive Mercedes. The ones that re on the
unconsciousness, informal take.1921W. Somerset Maugham The Trembling of a
Leaf Walker had always been a heavy drinker, take someone or something apart Qdis he was proud of his capacity to see men half mantle something. defeat someone or
his age under the table. something conclusively. criticize
someone or something severely, informal
tack take something as read accept something
come down to brass tacks: see BRASS. without reading or discussing it. British
taking 286
take the biscuit or bun or cake be the most talk the hind leg off a donkey talk
remarkable, informal incessantly. British informal
1925 P. G. Wodehouse Letter Of all the
In 1808 talking a horse hind leg offwas
poisonous, foul, ghastly places, Cannes takes
described as an old vulgar hyperbole in
the biscuit with absurd ease.
Cobbett Weekly Political Register, but the
take it into your head: see HEAD. version with donkey was current by the mid
take it on the chin: see N. 19th century. In 1879 Anthony Trollope
mentioned talk the hind legs off a dog as an
take it or leave it said to convey that the Australian variant.
offer you have made is not negotiable and
that you are indifferent to another 1970 Nina Bawden The Birds on the Trees Talk,
reaction to it. talk—talk the hind leg off a donkey, that
one.take someone name in vain: see VAIN.
talk nineteen to the dozen talk incessantly.
take no prisoners: see PRISONER. British
take someone point: see POINT.No convincing reason has been put
take something lying down: see LYING. forward as to why nineteen should have been ;
take stock: see STOCK. preferred in this idiom rather than twenty or any other number larger than twelve.take something to heart: see HEART.
take to your heels: see HEEL. 1998 Pamela Jooste Dance with a Poor Man  
take someone to the cleaners: see CLEANER. DaughterHe hasn even got his foot in the door
before she talking nineteen to the dozen and
take up the gauntlet: see throw down the hanging round his neck and asking if he got
gauntlet at GAUNTLET. sweets in his pocket.
talk shop: see SHOP.
taking talk the talk speak fluently or convincingly
for the taking of a person or thing ready about something or in a way intended to
or available for someone to take please or impress others, informal
advantage of. 1997 Beautiful British Columbia We may not
1994 Jane Hamilton A Map of the World try to look like true rock jocks yet, but we talk the
imagine the land for the taking, and what it talk.
must have meant to have space for as far as the
talk through your hat talk foolishly, wildly,
eye can see.or ignorantly. informaltale Vulgar variants of this expression
include talking through your backside,
herein or therein lies a tale there is a story
arse, and ass.connected with this.
1998 Spectator Now it has decided to fight back talk turkey: see TURKEY.
and clear its name. And herein lies a tale,however ludicrous. tall
an old wives tale: see OLD. a tall order something that is difficult to
accomplish.
talk 1998 Times But the UK economy had to slow
chalk and talk: see CHALK.down somewhat, and gliding it down to
exactly the right spot was a tall order.
talk big talk confidently or boastfully, informal
a tall poppy a privileged or distinguished
talk of the devil: see speak of the devil at person.
DEVIL.The Roman tyrant Tarquin was reputed totalk a blue streak: see BLUE.
have struck off the heads of poppies as a
talk dirty: see DIRTY. gruesomely graphic demonstration of the
talk a good game talk convincingly yet fail way in which the important men of a
to act effectively. US informal captured city should be treated. In recent
years, the term tall poppy syndrome has
2000 Sunday Times There were two types of
also developed, referring to a tendencypeople in the industry: the consultants who
to discredit or disparage people who
talk a good game but deliver little, and the have become rich, famous, or socially
wide boys and girls who get bums on seats but prominent.
sacrifice standards.
287 team
1991 Lynn Barber Mostly Men Journalists on the ob interview, making the marriage proposal:
whole tend to be egalitarian-minded and you think you ve got it taped.
contemptous of tall poppies, but prefer the
prima donnas. tapison the tapis of a subject under considera tandem tion or discussion.
in tandem one behind another.This expression is a partial translation of
Q alongside each other; together.the French phrase sur le tapis, meaning
The Latin word tandem means at length : literally on the carpet. A carpet in this it was originally used in English as a term for a context is a covering for a table rather than a carriage drawn by two horses harnessed one floor, as indeed it is in the English idiom on
in front of the other. Sense 1 preserves this the carpet. It refers to the covering of the
late 18th-century sense, but since the mid council table around which a matter would
20th century the phrase has been commonly be debated.
used to mean simply functioning as a team. tartangled beat or whale the tar out of beat or thrash
a tangled web a complex, difficult, and severely. North American informal
confusing situation or thing. tar and feather smear with tar and then
This phrase comes from Sir Walter Scott ; cover with feathers as a punishment.
epic poem Marmion 1808; what a This practice was introduced in Britain in
tangled web we weave, When first we 1189, when Richard decreed that it should
practise to deceive! be the punishment for members of the navy
found guilty of theft. It seems to have been
intermittently imposed on other wrongdoers
tango in Britain and has sometimes been inflicted
it takes two to tango both parties involved on an unpopular or scandalous individual by
in a situation or argument are equally a mob.
responsible for it. informal
1981 Anthony Price Soldier No More The
O Taces 7Wo to fanço was the title of a 1952 Russians... wouldn have cared less if we d
j song by AI Hoffman and Dick Manning. tarred and feathered Nasser and run him out
of Suez on a rail.
1996 Washington Post It takes two to tango in
this... business. Both your computer video tar people with the same brush consider
card and your monitor must be capable of a specified people to have the same faults.
given rate to achieve it.
Tartar
tap catch a Tartar: see CATCH.
on tap ready to be poured from a tap.
0 freely available whenever needed.taste
informal on schedule to happen or occur. a bad or bitter or nasty taste in the or
North American informal someone mouth a strong feeling of
distress or disgust following an experience.
taped informal
have or get someone or something taped a taste of your own medicine: see a dose of
understand someone or something fully. your own medicine at MEDICINE.
British informal taste blood: see BLOOD.
Early examples ofthe phrase, dating from tea
the early 20th century, do not make its
development clear: the sense could derive
not for all the tea in China not at any price;
either from the action of measuring someone certainly not! informal
with a tape measure or from that of tying tea and sympathy hospitality and
someone or something up with tape andthereby getting them under control.
consolation offered to a distressed person.2001 John Diamond C: Because Cowards Get
team
Cancer Too After a few false starts you ve a whole team and the dog under the wagon
learned how to do sending the meal back, a person of superior ability; an outstand dropping the girlfriend, getting through the ingly gifted or able person. US
tear 288about the movements of the police in
tear ! the Australian bush or outback. Compare
shed crocodile tears: see C with hear something on the grapevine
tear your hair out act with or show extreme : at GRAPEVINE.
desperation, informal
1991 Jill Churchill A Farewell to Yarns
Someplace people were having nervous tell
breakdowns and tearing their hair out in a tell it like it is describe the true facts of a
desperate effort to please Phyllis. situation no matter how unpleasant theymay be. informal
tear off a strip or tear a strip
off someone rebuke someone angrily. tell something a mile off: see see something
informal a mile off at MILE.
tell tales out of school gossip about or
This expression was originally RAF slang, reveal another person secrets, wrong first recorded in the 1940s.
doings, or faults.
tear someone or something to shreds or As telling tales to school authorities is a
pieces criticize someone or something terrible offence in the eyes of schoolchildren, aggressively, informal this expression is often used in the context of without tears of a subject presented so as to declining to supply information or gossip.
be learnt or achieved easily.
1991 William Fox Willoughby Phoney War 1991 Mark Tully No Full Stops in India Indira
trusted me throughout her life, and just
They are going to be given theirfirstlesson because she dead it not right that this afternoon. Skiing without tears, hardly should break that trust and tell tales about
think. her.tell that to the marines: see A .teeter
tell someone where to get off or where
teeter on the brink or edge be very close to
a difficult or dangerous situation. they get off angrily rebuke someone.
1997 James Ryan Dismantling Mr Doyle informal
Letting her secret teeter on the brink of tell where to put or what to do
becoming public was a game Eve played with something angrily or emphatically
more and more. reject something, informal
teeth telling
armed to the teeth: see A D. that would be telling that would be
cast something in someone teeth: see A T. divulging confidential information.
rare as hen teeth: see N. informal
set teeth on g cause someone 2000 Imogen Edwards-Jones My Canapé Hell
Are you propositioning me? say, attempting
to feel intense discomfort or irritation.
to look provocative in my Devonshire home This is an expression used in the Bible to knit and Angora Dutch cap. Now that would
describe the unpleasant sensation caused by be telling, he smiles.
eating something bitter or sour: every man there no telling it impossible to know
that eateth the sour grape, his teeth shall be what has happened or will happen.
set on edge Jeremiah 31:30.
1997 Kate Riordan The Boy in the Moon Julia tempest
voice sustained a quavery note that set Brian a tempest in a teapot: see a a teacup
teeth on edge. at STORM.sow dragon teeth: see A G .telegraph tempt
tempt fate or providence act rashly.
bush telegraph a rapid informal spreading of
informal
information or rumour; the network
through which this takes place.tenterhook
This expression orginated in the late 19th on tenterhooks in a state of suspense or
century, referring to the network of agitation because of uncertainty about a
informers who kept bushrangers informedfuture event.
289 thick
A tenter is a framework on which fabric there
can be held taut for drying or other
treatment during the manufacturing process; been there, done that used to express past
in the past tenterhooks were hooks or bent experience of or familiarity with
nails fixed in the tenter to hold the fabric in something, informal
position. The metaphorical use of the phrase This is often used as a flippant expression for an agitated state of mind dates from the mid 18th century. of boredom or world-weariness. A late 20th- century elaboration parodies the blasétourist attitude to experience: been there,
done that, got the T-shirt.term
in no uncertain terms: see UNCERTAIN. 1996 United Church Observer Having no partner
on terms Qin a state of friendship or equal- to pick up after me—been there, done that—I
tend to, well, let things accumulate.
ity. @in sport level in score or on points.be there for someone be available to provide
territory support or comfort for someone, especially
go or come with the territory be an at a time of adversity.
unavoidable result of a particular situation. 1998 Spectator Elegant, determined and
intelligent, she was the perfect tycoon wife:
Territory is probably used here in its early always there for her husband and ready to
20th-century US sense of the area in which a defend him.
sales representative or distributor has the
have been there or here before know allright to operate. about a situation as a result of previous
experience, informaltestthe acid test: see ACID.thereby
thereby hangs a tale used to indicate that
test the water judge people feelings orthere is more to say about something.
opinions before taking further action. 1948 Christopher Bush The Case of the Second
Chance He and Manfrey were Brutus and
tether Cassius respectively in that historic show at
at the end of your tether: see END. the Coliseum and thereby hangs a tale, or
rather a piece of scandal.thank
thank your lucky stars feel grateful for your thick
good fortune. a bit thick more than you can tolerate; unfair
1998 Times All Alec Stewart can do is thank his or unreasonable. British informal
lucky stars that his main strike bowler is fit 1991 Alistair Campbell Sidewinder thought
again. this was a bit thick, and to begin with tried todefend myself.
thanks give someone or get a thick ear punish
no thanks to not because of; despite. someone or be punished with a blow,
1993 Carl MacDougall. The Lights Below especially on the ear. British informal
How your mother? Our mother have a thick skin: see SKIN.
fine. No thanks to you. She was worried
sick. the thick of something the busiest or most
crowded part of something.thanks for the buggy ride used as a way of
thanking someone for their help. North 1999 Christopher Brookmyre One Fine Day in
the Middle of the Night They been in the thick
American dated of it, sharing God-knows-what experiences
A buggy was a light horse-drawn vehicle together, from foreplay to gunplay.
for one or two people. thick and fast rapidly and in great numbers.
thick as thieves of two or more people very
that close or friendly; sharing secrets, informal
and all that or and that and that sort of thick as two short planks very stupid.
thing; and so on. informal informal
1982 Simon Brett Murder Unprompted know
Variants of this expression include thick as he the star and all that, but damned if m
a plank and thick as a brick. There is a play on going to be upstaged, even by him.
thin 290
thick in its basic sense of relatively great impart useful information or experience.
depth from side to side and its colloquial
informalsense stupid. 1998 Spectator A docker of the 1950s... a sailor
thick on the ground: see GROUND. of any previous age could tell you a thing or
two about job insecurity.
through thick and thin under all a thing of shreds and patches: see SHRED.
circumstances, no matter how difficult.things that go bump in the night ghosts;
thin supernatural beings, informal
have a thin skin: see have a thick skin at This expression comes from The Cornish
SKIN. or West Country Litany: From ghoulies and
have a thin time have a wretched or ghostiesand long-leggety beasties And
things that go bump in the night, Good Lord uncomfortable time. British informa eliver us! The phrase is used as a humorous into or out of thin air into or out of a state way of referring to nocturna isturbances of of being invisible or nonexistent. all sorts.
on thin ice: see ICE.
thin on the ground: see thick on the ground thinkat GROUND. give someone furiously to think give a
the thin end of the wedge an action or person cause to think hard.
procedure of little importance in itself, but This is a literal translation of the French
which is likely to lead to more serious phrase donner furieusement à penser.
developments, informal
thin on top balding. have got another think coming used to
express the speaker disagreement with
thing or unwillingness to do something
be all things to all men or people please suggested by someone else, informal
everyone, typically by regularly altering 2000 Sunday Herald Glasgow The
your behaviour or opinions in order to accelerating pretender has another think
conform to those of others, be able to be coming if it imagines that it has an easy shot at
interpreted or used differently by different becoming world number one.
people to their own satisfaction. think on your feet react to events quickly
and effectively.This expression probably originated in
referenceto 1 Corinthians9:22: lam madeall think twice consider a course of action
things to all men. carefully before embarking on it.
be on to a good thing have found a job or think the world of: see WORLD.
other situation that is pleasant, profitable, thinking
or easy, informal put on your thinking cap meditate on a
a close or near thing a narrow avoidance of problem, informal
something unpleasant.
do the—thing engage in the particular form third
of behaviour typically associated with third time lucky after twice failing to
someone or something, informal, chiefly North accomplish something, the third attempt
American may be successful.
1999 Tim Lott White City Blue was going to ask j Third time lucky has been proverbial since Tony there, oil us all with a few bevvies, and the mid 19th century; a US variant is third
then do the best-man thing. time is the charm. 
do your own thing follow your owninterests or inclinations regardless of Thomas
others, informal a doubting Thomas: see DOUBTING.have a thing about be obsessed with or
prejudiced about, informalthornno rose without a thorn: see ROSE.
make a thing of regard as essential.
a thorn in someone side or flesh a source
cause a fuss about, informal of continual annoyance or trouble.
teach or tell someone a thing or two291 thumb
Atiornnthescecomesfromthebiblical on a person attention by repeatedly
book of Numbers 33:55: those which ye let putting them forward.
remain of them shall be pricks in your eyes, stick in your throat or gullet be difficult or
and thorns in your sides, and shall vex you in
the land wherein ye dwell. A thorn in the
impossible to accept; be a source of
flesh quotes 2 Corinthians 12:7: And lest continuing annoyance.
should be exalted above measure through
The literal sense refers to something
the abundance of the revelations, there was !
lodged in your throat which you can neither given to me a thorn in the flesh, the
swallow nor spit out. See also stick in yourmessenger of Satan to buffet me, lest should : craw at CRAW and stick in your gizzard
be exalted above measure. at GIZZARD.on thorns continuously uneasy, especially in
fear of being detected. throw
thought throw cold water on: see pour cold water on
a second thought a moment further at COLD.
consideration; any worry or concern. throw the baby out with the bathwater: see
BABY.thread throw down the gauntlet: see GAUNTLET.
hang by a thread be in a highly precarious throw dust in someone eyes mislead
state. someone by misrepresentation or
lose the or your thread be unable to follow diverting attention from a point.
what someone is saying or remember what throw good money after bad: see MONEY.
you are going to say next. throw your hand in give up; withdraw from
a contest.three
three musketeers three close associates or a games, especially poker, if you
inseparable friends. throwyour hand in you retire from the game, The Three Musketeers is a translation of throw in your lot with: see LOT.
Les Trois Mousquetaires, the title of a novel throw in the towel or sponge abandon a
by the 19th-century French writer Alexandre Dumas père. struggle; admit defeat.Boxers or their trainers traditionally
threescore : signa efeat by throwing the towel or
sponge used to wipe a contestant face into threescore and ten the age of seventy. the middle of the ring.
l the Bible, threescore and ten amounts to the allotted span of a person life: The
throw stones criticize someone ordays of our age are threescore years and ten something.
Psalm 90:10.This expression is often used with
reference to the proverbial saying those who 
thrill live in glass houses should not throw stones, the earliest variant of which is recorded in the thrills and spills the excitement of dangerous mid 17th century.
sports or entertainments, especially as
experienced by spectators. throw someone to the dogs: see DOG.
throw someone to the wolves: see WOLF.
throat
be at each other throats of people or throw your weight behind someone use
organizations quarrel or fight persistently. your influence to help support someone.
1990 Rian Malan My Traitor Heart It not informal
only difficult for people outside to understand 2000 South African Times U.K. Tony Blair
why blacks are at each others throats, he and... Bill Clinton have thrown their weight
says. It difficult for ourselves. behind a South African-engineered Marshall
Plan to rescue the developing world from
cut your own throat bring about your own deepening poverty.
downfall by your actions.
force or ram or shove something down thumb
be all fingers and thumbs: see FINGER.someone throat force ideas or materialthunder 292
thumb your nose at show disdain or tide
contempt for. Compare with cock a snook go or swim with or against the tide act in
at SNOOK. accordance with or against the prevailing
thumbs up or down an indication of opinion or tendency.
satisfaction or approval or of rejection ortie
failure, informal
The thumbs were used to signal approval tie someone hand and foot: see bind
or disapproval by spectators at a Roman someone hand and foot at HAND.
amphitheatre, though they used thumbs the old school tie: see OLD.
down to signify that a beaten gladiator had tie the knot: see KNOT.
performed well and should be spared, and
thumbs up to call for his death. tie one on get drunk. North American informal
tie yourself in knots: see KNOT.
twiddle your thumbs: see TWIDDLE.
under someone thumb completely under tied
someone influence or control. fit to be tied: see FIT.
thunder tiger
steal someone thunder: see STEAL. have a tiger by the tail have embarked on a
course of action which proves unexpect tick edly difficult but which cannot easily or
on tick on credit, informal safely be abandoned.
Tick is an abbreviation of ticket, a note An alternative way of referring to the
recording money or goods received on credit, same predicament is ride a tiger, which
alludes to the Chinese saying he who rides a tight as a tick: see TIGHT. tiger cannot dismount. A similar difficulty
what makes someone tick what motivates confronts those who have a wolf by the ears see WOLF.someone, informal
a tiger in your tank energy, spirit, or
ticket animation.
be tickets be the end. South African informal
This expression originated as a 1960s
have tickets on yourself be excessively vain advertising slogan for Esso petrol: Put a tiger or proud of yourself. Australian informal in your tank .punch your ticket deliberately undertake
particular assignments that are likely to tight
lead to promotion at work. US informal run a tight ship be very strict in managing an
split the ticket: see SPLIT. organization or operation.
work your ticket contrive to obtain your tight as a tick extremely drunk, informal
discharge from prison or the army. The simile as full as a tick occurs in a late write your own ticket dictate your own 17th-century proverb collection, referring to
terms. North American informal the way in which the blood-sucking insects
swell astheygorgethemselves. Inthe modern ;tickey expression, there is a play on tight as an
on a tickey in a very small area. South African informal synonym for drunk and its literal
meaning stretched taut , like a tick satiated In the period before South Africanwith blood. !
coinage was decimalized, a tickey was a very small silver coin worth three pennies.
a tight corner or spot or place a difficult
situation.tickled 1994 Interzone The temptation to also invent
be tickled pink or to death be extremely some kind of magical McGuffin to get his hero
amused or pleased, informal out of a tight corner is something he works
1992 Guy Vanderhaeghe Things As They Are She hard to avoid.
made a big show of not being taken in by him,
but could see that all six feet... of her was tighten
tickled pink by his attentions. tighten your belt: see BELT.293 tip
tighten the screw: see SCREW. time so long ago that people have no
knowledge or memory of it.
tile l a terms in Britain, time immemorial 
on the tiles away from home having a wild or refers to the time up to the beginning of the enjoyable time and not returning until late reign of Richard in 1189. A variant of the
in the evening or early in the morning. phrase is time out of mind.
informal, chiefly Britishtime is money time is a valuable resource,
T image here is of a cat out on the therefore it better to do things as quickly
rooftops at night. The expression has been in as possible, proverb
use since the late 19th century.
The present form of the expression seems to originate in a speech made by
till Benjamin Franklin in 1748, but the sentiment have or with your fingers or hand in the is much older. The saying the most costly
till stealing from your employer. Compare outlay is time is attributed to the 5th-century with with your hand in the cookie j a at BC Athenian orator and politician
COOKIE. Antiphon.
time was there was a time.
tilt 1998 Times Time was when venture capital
at full tilt with maximum energy or force; was shunned by self-respecting, ambitious
at top speed. corporate financiers... No longer.
1912 Edith Wharton letter Just after we left only time will tell the truth or correctness
Modena a crazy coachman drove full tilt out of of something will only be established at
a side road.
some time in the future.
tilt at windmills attack imaginary enemies or
evils. tinhave a tin ear be tone-deaf.
In Cervantes 17th-century mock-chivalric nove on Quixote, the eponymous hero
little tin god: see GOD.
attacked windmills in the deluded belief thatput the tin lid on: see put the lid on at LID.
they were giants.tinkernot give or care a tinker curse or cuss or
time damn not care at all. informal
ahead of your or its time: see AHEAD.
In former times, tinkers itinerant
give someone the time of day be pleasantly menders of pots, pans, and other metal
polite or friendly to someone. utensils had a reputation for using bad
1999 Salman Rushdie The Ground Beneath Her language. The expression is often shortened Feet You can greet her courteously but she to not give a tinker . won give you the time of day, you can speak
to her nice as pie but she won act polite. 1984 Patrick Brian The Far Side of the World
When was a squeaker nobody gave a tinker  
in the nick of time: see NICK.curse whether my daily workings were right
know the time of day be well informed or wrong.
about something.tip
pass the time of day exchange a greeting or be on the tip of your tongue be almost but
casual remarks. not quite able to bring a particular word or
take time by the forelock: see FORELOCK. name to mind, be about to utter a
comment or question but then think better
time and tide wait for no man if you don t
of it.
make use of a favourable opportunity, you 1977 Bernard MacLaverty Between Two Shores It
may never get the same chance again. was on the tip of his tongue to ask her but he
proverbdidn have the courage.
Although the tide in this phrase is nowusually understood to mean the tide of the
tip your hand or mitt reveal your intentions
sea , it was originally just another way of inadvertently. US informal
saying time , used for alliterative effect.
This expression is the opposite of keep
your cards close to your chest see CARD.
time immemorial used to refer to a point of
tired 294
1966 Martin Woodhouse Tree Frog We 1921 John Dos Passos Three Soldiers If he just
couldn very well oppose it without tipping watched out and kept on his toes, he be sure
our hand. to get it.
tip your hat or cap raise or touch your hat a toe in the door a first chance of ultimately
or cap as a way of greeting or acknow- achieving what you want; a position from
ledging someone. which further progress is possible.
tip someone off give someone information informal
about something, typically in a discreet or
The image here is of placing yourfoot in a confidential way. informa oorway in such a way as to prevent the door the tip of an iceberg: see ICEBERG. being closed in your face.
tip or turn the scales or balance of a
circumstance or event be the deciding toe the line accept the authority, principles,
factor; make the critica ifference. or policies of a particular group, especiallyunder pressure.
tip someone the wink give someone private
information; secretly warn someone of Competitors in a race toe the line by
something. British informal placing their toes on the starting line.
tired 1998 Times An insider suggests... that the said
tired and emotiona runk. minister is... on the skids. The minister
smarts, and toes the line.
This is a humorous euphemism, used turn up your toes die. informal
originally in newspapers in contexts where
the word drunk would lay the publication This originated as a mid 19th-century
open to a libel charge. It is particularly expression, a more elaborate version being
associated with the British satirical magazine ! turn your toes up to the daisies.
Private Eye.toffeetit not be able to do something for toffee be
tit for tat a situation in which an injury or totally incompetent at doing something.
insult is given in return or retaliation. British informal
2000 Times Wordsworth himself couldn t
toast spell for toffee, and his punctuation was
be toast be or be likely to become finished, extraordinarily bad.
defunct, or dead, informal, chiefly North American
1998 Times A new star has entered the token
financial firmament. Look to your laurels, by the same token in the same way; for the
George Soros, Warren Buffett, you re toast. same reason.
have someone on toast be in a position to 1975 Frederick Exley Pages from a Cold Island
deal with someone asyou wish. British informal The student could ask anything he chose, and
1993 Esquire The more he thought, the more by the same token Wilson could if he elected
knew had him on toast. choose not to answer.tod Tom
on your tod on your own; alone. British informal Tom, Dick, and Harry used to refer to
ordinary people in general.
In rhyming slang, on your Tod Sloan
means on your own. The Tod Sloan in This expression is first recorded in an 18th- question was a famous American jockey who century song: Farewell, Tom, Dick, and Harry, made his name in horse racing in the 1890s. Farewell, Moll, Nell, and Sue. It is generally
used in mildly derogatory contexts he didn want every Tom, Dick, and Harry knowing
toe their business to suggest a large number of dig in your toes: see dig in your heels at DIG. ordinary or undistinguished people.
make someone toes curl bring about an
extreme reaction in someone, either of Tom Tiddler ground a place where money
pleasure or disgust, informal or profit is readily made.
1984 Paul Prudhomme Louisiana Kitchen This is Tom Tiddler ground was the name of a so good it ll make your toes curl! children game in which one of the players, !
on your toes ready for any eventuality. named Tom Tiddler, marked out their
295 touch
territory by drawing a line on the ground. The over the top to an excessive or exaggerated
other players ran over this line calling out degree, in particular so as to go beyond
We re on Tom Tiddler ground, picking upreasonable or acceptable limits.
gold and silver. They were then chased by
Tom Tiddler and the first or, sometimes, the The phrase go over the top originated in last to be caught took his or her place. the First World War, when it referred to
troops in the trenches charging over the
parapets to attack the enemy. In modern use tomorrow over the top is often abbreviated to OTT.
as if there was or as though there were no
tomorrow with no regard for the future top and tail remove the top and bottom of
consequences. a fruit or vegetable while preparing it as
1980 Guardian Weekly Oil supplies that food, wash the face and bottom of a baby
Americans at home continue to consume as or small child. British
though there were no tomorrow. top the bill: see BILL.
tomorrow is another day the future will
top dollar a very high price. North Americanbring fresh opportunities. informal
This phrase was in use as long ago as the 2000 Ralph Klein has invested millions in
early 16th century, in the form tomorrow is a ; building a non-conformist image... an image
new day. that has enabled the company to charge top
dollar.
the top of the tree the highest level of atongue profession or career.
the gift of tongues the power of speaking in
unknown languages, regarded as one of the
gifts of the Holy Spirit.
torchcarry a torch for feel especially unrequited
When the disciples of Jesus were filled love for.
with the Holy Spirit after Pentecost Acts 1996 TV Times A dentist carrying a torch for
2:1-4, the gift of tongues was one of the the local strawberry blonde wonders if he
ways in which this phenomenon manifested married the right woman.
itself; compare with speak in tongues
at SPEAK. hand on or pass the torch pass on a
tradition, especially one of learning or
have a silver tongue: see SILVER. enlightenment.
someone tongue is hanging out someone
The image here is that of the runners in a is very eager for something, especially a relay passing on the torch to each other, as
drink. was the custom in the ancient Greek Olympic iGames. The tradition of the torch relay is
with tongue in cheek speaking or writing
preserved as a prelude to the modern
in an ironic or insincere way. Olympics, with a team of runners carrying the This expression originated in the fuller Olympic torch vast distances across various
form put or thrust your tongue in your cheek, countries until the site of the Games is
meaning speak insincerely. At one time, reached.
putting your tongue in your cheek could also be a gesture of contempt, but that shade of put to the torch or put a torch to destroy by
meaning has disappeared from the modern burning.idiom.
with forked tongue: see FORKED. tossgive or care a toss care at all. British informal
tooth 1998 Country Life have swum in the Dart only
a few yards from a mink, and the mink has not
fight tooth and nail fight very fiercely.given a toss.
top toss your cookies vomit. North American informal

from top to bottom completely;touch
thoroughly. lose your touch not show your customary
off the top of your head: see HEAD. skill.
on top of the world happy and elated. 1991 Times The guv nor is a former pork
informal butcher who has clearly not lost his touch.
touchpaper 296
the Midas touch: see MIDAS. 1996 Dougie Brimson & Eddie Brimson
Everywhere We Go: Behind the Matchday Madne
a soft or easy touch someone who is easily When there is a major incident, the press still
manipulated; a person or task easily go to town and we are bombarded with
handled, informal graphic images of bloody faces.
A touch was mid 19th-century criminal on the town enjoying the entertainments,
slang for the act of getting money from a especially the nightlife, of a city or town.
person, either by pickpocketing or by informal
persuasion. Touch was later extended to refer : to the person targeted in this way, and a soft paint the town red: see PAINT.
touch was specifically a person from whom town and gown non-members and
money could easily be obtained.
members of a university in a particular
1998 Times Henman can be something of a soft place.
touch. For every leading player who touts his The gown is the academic dress worn by
potential, two from the basement would university members, now required only on
relish his name in the draw. ceremonial or formal occasions. The
touch base: see BASE. distinction between town and gown was
made in these specific terms in early
touch bottom reach the bottom of water 19th-century Oxford and Cambridge, but the
with your feet, be at the lowest or worst traditional hostility between the native
point, be in possession of the full facts. inhabitants of the two cities and the
British incoming students has been a long-standing
phenomenon, as is evidenced by the
a touch of the sun a slight attack of sunstroke.
St Scholastica Day riot in Oxford in 1354.
touch wood: see WOOD.
would not touch someone or something
with a bargepole: see BARGEPOLE.
tracekick over the traces: see KICK.touchpaper track
light the touchpaper: see light a fuse at cover your tracks: see COVER.
LIGHT.
ump the track: see JUMP.
tough make tracks for leave for a place, informal
tough as old boots very sturdy or resilient. 1984 David Brin Practice Effect We have another
big climb ahead of us and another pass to get
Leather, of which boots are traditionally through. Let make tracks.
made, is notably strong and resistant to wear
off the beaten track: see BEATEN.
and tear. As tough as leather was in fact the earliest version of this phrase, although it has the wrong side of the tracks a poor or less
now been superseded by the current form. prestigious part of town, informal
1967 Listener This is no sweet old dolly... She The expression, American in origin, comes is tough as old boots, working for a living. from the idea of a town divided by a railroad
track. In 1929, Thome Smith wrote In most
tough it out endure a period of difficult
commuting towns... there are always two
conditions, informal sides of which the tracks serve as a line of
1998 Cosmopolitan Hang in there and tough it demarcation. There is the right side and the out. If you don t, you might be left with wrong side. Translated into terms of modern !
permanent fears about starting in new jobs, American idealism, this means, the rich side
and that will stifle your career. and the side that hopes to be rich. 
towel 1977 Listener Eva Duarte Peron... came from
the wrong side of the tracks.
throw in the towel: see THROW.traffic
tower as much as the traffic will bear as much as
tower of strength: see STRENGTH. the trade or market will tolerate; as much
as is economically viable.town
go to town do something thoroughly or tragedy
extravagantly, with a great deal of energy tragedy of the commons the inevitable
and enthusiasm, informa amage done to a limited resource when297 trick
too many people try to avail themselves someone, especially by encroaching on
of it. their privileges.
tread water maintain an upright positionThis phrase arose from the ancient English !
in the water by moving the feet with a
custom by which villagers were allowed tograze their animals on common land;
walking movement and the hands with a
thoughtless or greedy people put too many downward circular motion. fail to
animals on the commons, impoverishing the advance or make progress.
land and thereby the whole community. 01996 Financial Post The NAPM index... has
been treading water since the spring, and that
1998 New Scientist All Web users are modernis making a lot of people nervous.
players in an old socia ilemma known as the
tragedy of the commons. By blindly acting in tread on air: see walk on air at AIR.
their own interests they are spoiling a valuable
common resource. treat— a treat used to indicate that someone or
trail something does something specified very
blaze a trail: see BLAZE. well or satisfactorily. British informal
trail or drag your coat deliberately provoke 1988 Ray Pickernell Yanto Summer A flared
a quarrel or fight. cream pleated skirt that complemented those
long perfect brown legs, and a powder blue tee
If you trail your coat behind you someone shirt that matched her eyes a treat.
is likely to step on it, either intentionally or
unintentionally, so enabling you to pick a treefight. This behaviour was traditionally grow on trees: see GROW. associated with Irishmen at Donnybrook Fair,
an annual fair once held in what is now a out of your tree completely stupid; mad.
suburb of Dublin. Charlotte M. Yonge, in the informalnovel Womankind 1877, alludes to this
up a tree in a difficult situation without
association: Party spirit is equally ready to
give offence and to watch for it. It will trail its escape; cornered, informal, chiefly North American
coat like the Irishman in the fair. trial
1980 James Ditton Copley Hunch was trailingtrial and error the process of experimenting
my coat... Trying to get the Luftwaffe to come with various methods of doing something
up and fight. until you find the most successful.
transom trial by television or the media discussion
of a case or controversy on television or inover the transom offered or sent without
the media involving or implying
prior agreement; unsolicited. US informalaccusations against a particular person.
A transom is a crossbar set above a door or
window, and the word can also be used, trice
especially in American English, as a term for a in a trice in a moment; very quickly.
small window set above this crossbar. In
former times, before the advent of air In late Middle English, ara frce meant at conditioning, many offices would leave one pull or tug , and it soon developed the
these windows open for the purposes of figurative meaning of in a moment,
ventilation, thereby allowing an aspiring immediately. By the late 17th century the
author to take their manuscript to an editor original form of the expression had given way office and slip it through the open windowto to the more familiar in a trice. Trice itself
land on the floor inside. So, a manuscript that comes from a Middle Dutch verb meaning
arrived over the transom was one that was hoist. unexpected. The phrase is still often used in
publishing contexts, although it is no longer
confined to them. trick
1976 Piers Anthony But What of Earth? Editors a bag of tricks: see BAG.
claim to be deluged with appallingly bad a box of tricks: see BOX.
material over the transom fromunagented do the trick achieve the required result.
writers.informal1990 Niki Hil eath Grows On You Ifigureda
tread box of candy would do the trick, would
tread or step on someone toes offend bring some colour back.tried 298
every trick in the book every available Trojan
method of achieving what you want, informal work like a Trojan work extremely hard.
not miss a trick: see MISS. 1974 Winifred Foley A Child in the Forest She
put me to clean out all the fowls cotes, and
the oldest trick in the book a ruse so worked at it like a Trojan.
hackneyed that it should no longer deceive
a Trojan horse a person or device intended
anyone. to undermine an enemy or bring about
a trick worth two of that a much better plan their downfall. a program designed
or expedient, informal to breach the security of a computer
This phrase is from Shakespeare Henry system, especially by ostensibly
the Fourth, Part 1: know a trick worth two functioning as part of a legitimate
of that faith. program, in order to erase, corrupt, or
tricks of the trade special ingenious remove data.
techniques used in a profession or craft, In Greek mythology, the Trojan horse was especially those that are little known by a huge hollow wooden statue of a horse in
outsiders. which Greek soldiers concealed themselves in order secretly to enter and capture the city of turn a trick of a prostitute have a session Troy, an action which brought the ten-year
with a client, informal siege of the city to an end.
up to your old tricks misbehaving in a
characteristic way. informaltrolley
off your trolley crazy, informaltried
tried and true proved effective or reliable by The trolley in this case is a pulley running :
experience. on an overhead track that transmits power
1967 Listener Miss Aukin had the good from the track to drive a tram; the idea is
sense to use the tried and true concealment similar to that in go off the rails see RAIL.
gambit by which eventually two young 1983 Nathaniel Richard Nash The Young and
officers, bent on cuckolding a greengrocer, Fair If you suspect Patty, you re off your
were compelled to hide in the same trolley.
grandfather clock.trooper
trim lie like a trooper: see LIE.
in trim slim and healthy. swear like a trooper: see SWEAR.
trim your sails make changes to suit your
new circumstances. trot
on the trot in succession. continually
Literally, trim a sail means adjust busy. British informal
the sail of a boat to take advantage of thewind. troth
plight your troth: see PLIGHT.trip trouble
trip the light fantastic dance, humorous
meet trouble halfway distress yourself
This expression comes from the invitation unnecessarily about what may happen.
to dance in John Milton poem Allegro 1645: Come, and trip it as ye go On the lighttrousers
fantastic toe .catch someone with their trousers down: see
catch someone with their pants down at
PANTS.trivet
right as a trivet perfectly all right; in good wear the trousers be the dominant partner
health. British informal in a marriage or the dominant person in a
household, informal
A trivet is an iron tripod placed over a fire for a cooking pot or kettle to stand on. It is trout
used in this expression to represent firmness and steadiness.
old trout an unattractive or bad-tempered
old woman, informal299 tunnel
1972 Victor Canning. The Rainbird Pattern She gospel truth: see GOSPEL.
wasn such a bad old trout. For all her moneynaked truth: see NAKED.
and position, life hadn been all good to her.the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
trowel but the truth the full and unvarnished
lay something on with a trowel: see lay truth.
something on thick at LAY. These words are part of the statement
sworn by witnesses giving evidence in court,
truck They are often used informally to emphasize have or want no truck with avoid the absolute veracity of a statement.
dealing or being associated with. be
unsympathetic or opposed to. try
The earliest sense of truck was trading bytry conclusions with: see CONCLUSION.
the exchange of commodities from Frenchtry a fall with contend with.
troquer, meaning barter , from which
developed the sense communication or try something for size try out or test
dealings. something for suitability.
try your hand see how skilful you are,especially at the first attempt.
true 1994 John Barth Once Upon a Time Since such
out of true or the true not in the correct or dreaminess appeared to be my nature... why
exact shape. didn try my hand at writing fiction?
1984 Jonathan Gash The Gondola Scam They all
look scarily out of true, and do mean a tube
terrible angle. Pisa got one sloper. go down the tube or tubes be completely
true as Bob or God absolutely true. South lost or wasted; fail utterly, informal
African informaltug
trumpet tug of love a dispute over the custody of a
blow your own trumpet talk openly and child. British informal
boastfully about your achievements.
1998 Spectator only mention this to blow my tune
own trumpet... it was a source of great pride call the tune: see call the shots at CALL.
to be reinstated at the specific behest ofchange your tune: see CHANGE.
Britain most distinguished black radical
ournalist. there many a good tune played on an old
fiddle someone abilities do not depend
on their age. proverbtrump 1997 Times Old Star remained as cool and
come or turn up trumps Qof a person or collected as if he had been training for this day
situation have a better performance or for months. Which only goes to show that
outcome than expected, of a person be there is many a good tune played on an old
especially generous or helpful, informal, fiddle.
chiefly British to the tune of amounting to or involving the
In bridge, whist, and similar card games, considerable sum of. informal
trumps are cards of the suit that has been 1996 LSE Magazine The average student also
chosen to rank above the other suits. The leaves in debt to the tune of several thousand
word trump is an alteration of triumph, pounds to the bank or the Student Loan
which was once used in card games in the Company.
same sense.tunedtuned in aware of or able to understandtrust something, informal
not trust someone as far as you can throw 1994 Today Parent It is more important to be
them not trust or hardly trust a particular tuned in to your child needs than to be the
person at all. informal boss.truth tunnel
economical with the truth: see ECONOMICAL. light at the end of the tunnel: see LIGHT.
turkey 300turkey In this expression, turn-up refers to the
turning up or over of a particular card in a
go cold turkey: see COLD. game, while the book in question is one kept like turkeys voting for Christmas used to by a bookie to record bets made on a race.
suggest that a particular action or
decision is hopelessly self-defeating.informal turtle
talk turkey talk frankly and straight- turn turtle turn upside down.
forwardly; get down to business. North If a turtle is flipped over on to its back, it American informal becomes helpless and unable to move. The
phrase has long been used figuratively of
This phrase was first recorded in the mid inanimate objects, especially boats, that have 19thcentury,whenitgenerallyhadtherather turned upside down or overturned.
different sense of say pleasant things or talk politely. Although several theories have 1990 Stephen King The Stand His tractor
been put forward, its origins are not clear. turned turtle on him and killed him.twain
turn never the twain shall meet two people or
Buggins turn appointment in rotation things are too different to exist alongside or
rather than by merit. understand each other. 
Buggins is used here to represent a typical This phrase comes from Rudyard Kipling or generic surname. poem The Ballad of East and West 1892:
Oh, East is East and West is West, and never not turn a hair: see HAIR. the twain shall meet. one good turn deserves another if someone
does you a favour, you should take the
chance to repay it. twelve
to a turn to exactly the right degree used twelve good men and true a jury, dated
especially in relation to cooking. A jury in a court of law was traditionally
1931 Good Housekeeping The meal began with a! composed of twelve men. Nowadays, of
magnificent bass, broiled to a turn over heart- course, women also sit on juries, and so this
wood coals. phrase is falling out of use.
turn cat in pan: see CAT.
turn the corner pass the critical point and twice
start to improve. be twice the man or woman that someone is
turn your hand to: see HAND. be much better or stronger than someone.
turn someone head: see HEAD. think twice: see THINK.
turn an honest penny: see HONEST.
twiddleturn in your grave: see GRAVE. twiddle your thumbs be bored or idle
turn on your heel: see HEEL. because you have nothing to do.turn the other cheek: see CHEEK.
turn over a new leaf: see LEAF. twinkling
turn the scales: see SCALE. in a twinkling orthe twinkling of an eye in
turn the tables: see TABLE.
an instant; very quickly.
turn to ashes: see ASH. A twinkling is the time taken to wink or
blink an eye. The phrase can be traced back to 
turn a trick: see TRICK.
1 Corinthians 15:52: In a moment, in a
turn turtle: see TURTLE. twinkling of an eye, at the last trump: for the turn up your nose: see NOSE. trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be
raised incorruptible, and we shall be
changed , and it has been in figurative sense since medieval times.turn-up
a turn-up for the book a completelyunexpected event or occurrence; a twist
surprise. round the twist: see round the bend at BEND.301 two-way
twist someone arm persuade someone to two heads are better than one it helpful to
do something that they are or are thought have the advice or opinion of a second
to be reluctant to do. informal person, proverb
twist in the wind be left in a state of suspense 1994 James Kelman How Late It Was, How Late
or uncertainty. Cause it hard to do it yerself Keith, two heads
are better than one.
twist someone round your little finger: seeFINGER.
two a penny: see PENNY.
twist the lion tail provoke the resentmentof the British. US two-edged
a two-edged sword: see a double-edged
two sword at DOUBLE-EDGED.for two pins: see PIN.
in two shakes: see SHAKE.
twopenn orthit takes two to tango: see TANGO.add or put in your twopenn orth
put two and two together draw an obvious contribute your opinion, informal
conclusion from what is known or evident.The literal meaning of twopenn orth is
An extension of this phrase sputtwo and anamountofsomethingthatisworthorcosts two together and make five, meaning draw two pence ; by extension it can also be used to a plausible but incorrect conclusion from mean a small or insignificant amount of
what is known or evident. something .that makes two of us you are in the same
position or hold the same opinion as the two-way
previous speaker. two-way street a situation or relationship
two can play at that game used to assert that between two people or groups in which
one person bad behaviour can be copied action is required from both parties;
to that person disadvantage. something that works both ways.
Uuugly under
an ugly duckling a young person who turns under age not yet adult according to the law.
out to be beautiful or talented against all
expectations. university
the university of life the experience of life
The Ugly Duckling is a fairy tale by Hansregarded as a means of instruction.
Christian Andersen in which the ugly
duckling , mocked and jeered at by his
peers, eventually develops into a beautiful unpleasantness
the late unpleasantness the war that took
place recently.uncertain This phrase was originally used of the
in no uncertain terms clearly and force- ! American Civil War 1861-5.
fully.
1991 Kaye Gibbons A Cure for Dreams My untracked
mother got the doctor back out to our house
and told him in no uncertain terms to do what get untracked get into your stride or find
he was paid to do. your winning form, especially in sporting
contexts. USuncle unwashed
cry or say or yell uncle surrender or admit
defeat. North American informal the great unwashed the mass or multitude
1989 Guy Vanderhaeghe Homesick Beat of ordinary people, derogatory
him six ways to Sunday and he still 1997 Spectator Early piers tried to be rather
would never cry uncle or allow that there socially exclusive, but the need to maintain
was an outside chance of his ever being revenue soon opened the gates to the great
wrong. unwashed.
Uncle Tom Cobley or Cobleigh and all up
used to denote a long list of people. British it is all up with it is the end or there is no
informal hope for someone or something, informal
Uncle Tom Cobley is the last of a long 2002 Guardian The underlying problem is not
list of men enumerated in the ballad the science itself, but the fact that the science
Widdicombe Fair , which dates from around is telling politicians something they are
1800. desperate not to hear: that it all up with our
current model of gung-ho globalisation.
1966 Guardian It seems clear that a be up on be well informed about a matter or
compromise, half-way solution had equally
been ruled out by Government, Opposition, subject.
economists, press, TV, Uncle Tom Cobleigh on the up and up steadily improving.
and all. informal honest or sincere, informal, chieflyNorth American
unco something is up something unusual or
the unco guid strictly religious and undesirable is afoot or happening, informal
moralistic people. Scottish, chiefly derogatory 1994 Marianne Williamson IUuminata It feels
as though something is up, as though
Unco, a Scottish alteration of uncouth, something significant and big is about to
means remarkably or extremely , while guid
happen.
is the Scottish form of good. The expression
comes from Robert Burns Address to the up against it facing some serious but
Unco Guid, or the Rigidly Righteous 1787, unspecified difficulty, informal
and it generally carries an implicit charge of
hypocrisy. up and about or doing having risen from
bed; active.
303 upwardly
up and running taking place; active. In this expression, worn-out shoes are
1998 New Scientist The arms race may be up taken as an indication of someone poverty; and running again. the upper is the part of a shoe above the sole, which is all that is left after the sole has been !
up the ante: see ANTE.worn away.up for it ready to take part in a particular
activity, informal the upper crust the aristocracy and upper
2003 Observer If the chance ever arose to do my classes, informal
singing and play football for Southampton, d
be well up for it. In Anne Elizabeth Baker Glossary ofNorthamptonshire Words and Phrases 1854
up hill and down dale all over the place. Mrs Upper Crust is explained as the
2001 Observer Why get ourselves bogged down nickname for any female who assumes
with trials which may last many months and unauthorized superiority. The term was also
see our staff cross-examined up hill and down current in informal American speech in the
dale as defence counsel play the game of hunt mid 19th century. The French word gratin has
the informant? a similar pair of literal and metaphorical
senses, being literally a crust of crumbs andup in arms: see ARM.
cheese on top of a cooked dish and
up the spout: see SPOUT. metaphorically the highest class of society .up sticks: see STICK.
up to the mark: see MARK.upset
up to your tricks: see TRICK. upset the apple cart: see APPLE CART.
upgradeon the upgrade improving or progressing.uptake
be quick or slow on the uptake be quick or
upper slow to understand something, informal
have or gain the upper hand have or gain
advantage or control over someone or upwardly
something. upwardly mobile: see downwardly mobile
on your uppers extremely short of money. at MOBILE.
informalVv
yaîu take the veil become a nun.
take someone name in vain use someone annannrt 
name in a way that shows a lack of respect. vengeance
with a vengeance in a higher degree than
The third of the biblical Ten Command- as expected or desired; the fullest
ments is: Thou shalt not take the name of the sense,
Lord thy God in vain Exodus 20:7.vent
vale vent your spleen give free expression to your
vale of tears the world regarded as a scene of anger or displeasure,
trouble or sorrow, literary 2003 Guardian Woodgate clumsy
;- challenge on the striker was not contested,
This phrase dates from the mid 16th though the visitors wasted little time in
century; earlier variants included vale of venting spleen at both the culpable Danish
L.. .. 6. 66 ..3. 6. 06: midfielder and, erroneously, the young
1997 Shetland Times Then by God grace we ll pretender,
meet again, Beyond this vale of tears.
the vale of years the declining years of a ... kee
person life; old age. your cards close to your vest: see keep
.„ your cards close to your chest at CARD.
This expression comes from Shakespeare !
Othello: for am declin into the vale of victory:...y. .re. ... Pyrrhic victory: see PYRRHIC.
vanishing view
do a vanishing act: see do a disappearing act take a dim or poor view of regard
at DISAPPEARING. someone or something with disapproval.
1996 C. J. Stone Fierce Dancing He saysVariety that... the Home Office... take a dim view of
variety is the spice of life new and exciting lifers talking to the press.
experiences make life more interesting.village
T proverbial expression comes from k village: see K .3
William Cowper poem The Task 1785:
Variety the very spice of life, That gives it all ... .its flavour. Villain
the villain of the piece the main culprit.
v :i 1928 P. G. Wodehouse Money for Nothing m
sure you re on the right track. This bird Twist
beyond the veil in a mysterious or hidden villain of the piece.
place or state, especially the unknownstate of existence after death. vipera a was originally"a figurative in b a Person you have
reference to the veil which concealed the helped but who behaves treacherously
innermost sanctuary of the Temple in towards you.
Jerusalem; it was later taken as referring to : " the mysterious division between the next The phrase comes from one of Aesop  
world and this. fables, in which a viper reared in a person  
;
bosom eventually bites its nurturer. The idea draw a veil over avoid discussing or calling ! a f a " sinu viperam habere 
attention to something, especially because a appears in various forms :
it is embarrassing or unpleasant.
305 voteVirginia visiting
make a Virginia fence walk crookedly visiting fireman a visitor to an organization
because you are drunk. US given especially cordial treatment on
account of their importance. US
O A Virginia fence is a fence made of split
rails or poles joined in a zigzag pattern with
their ends crossing.voicestill small voice: see STILL.
a voice in the wilderness an unheeded
virtue advocate of reform.
make a virtue of necessity derive some
credit or benefit from an unwelcome The phrase was originally used with
obligation. reference to the words of John the Baptist,
who proclaimed the coming of the Messiah: This is a concept found in Latin in the am the voice of one crying in the wilderness 
writings of St Jerome: facis de necessitate John 1:23.
virtutem you make a virtue of necessity. It
passed into Old French faire de nécessité
vertu and wasapparentlyfirst used in English vote
around 1374 by Chaucer in Troilus and split the vote: see SPLIT.
Criseyde.vote with your feet indicate an opinion by
1997 Spectator How important it is for being present or absent.
humanity always to make a virtue out of 1982 Christian Order Uncounted thousands
necessity. have voted with their feet , i.e., have left the
Church.Ww
walk on eggs or eggshells be
wag extremely cautious about your wordsthe tail a g the dog: see A. or actions.wagon walk the plank: see PLANK.
fix someone a g : see F X. walk Spanish be made to walk under
hitch your a g to a star: see compulsion, informal
on the a g teetotal, informal The origins of this expression are not
clear. It may refer to the practice of pirates on This expression originated in early 20th- : the Spanish Main, who forced their captives century American use in the form on the to walk in a particular direction by gripping
water wagon, the implication being that a their collar and trousers tightly.
person on the water wagon would eschew alcohol in favour of water. walk your or the talk suit your actions to
your words, informal, chiefly North American
1989 Michael Norman These Good Men ll just
have a club soda with a twist of lime... on This expression is also found as walk the
the wagon. walk.a whole team and the dog under the
w a g : see A M. walk tall feel justifiable pride, informal
1992 Woman This week stop wishing you werewake somehow different. Start to walk tall!
wake up and smell the coffee become aware walk Matilda: see waltz Matilda at MATILDA.
of the realities of a situation, however
unpleasant, informal, chiefly North American walkabout
go walkabout wander around from place to
wake-up place in a protracted or leisurely way.
be a wake-up or awake up be fully alert or In Australian English, a walkabout is a
aware. Australian & New Zealand informal ourney into the bush undertaken by an
Aboriginal in order to live in a traditionalwalk manner and re-establish contact with
spiritual sources.
run before you can walk: see RUN.
walk all over Qdefeat easily, take
walkies
advantage of. informal go walkies go missing, especially as a result
walk before you can run grasp the basic of theft, informal
skills before attempting something more
difficult. walking
walk the chalk have your sobriety tested. a walking — someone who notably
Atraditional method of ascertaining embodies the characteristics of some whether someone is sober or not is to see thing, informal
whether they can walk along a line chalked 1989 Charles Shaar Murray Crosstown Traffic
on the ground without wobbling. He is... a dubious political philosopher and a
walking disaster area as a businessman.
walk someone off their feet or legs
exhaust a person with walking. wall
walk of life the position within society that a between you and me and the wall: see
person holds or the part of society to which between you and me and the bedpost at
they belong as a result of their job or social BEDPOST.
status. drive someone up the wall make someone
walk on air: see AIR. very irritated or angry, informal
307 wash
go to the wall Qof a business fail; go out and the woodbox, couldn see that getting
of business, support someone or something for nothing could be all that bad.
something, no matter what the cost to warm the cockles of someone heart: see
yourself, informal COCKLE.off the wall eccentric or unconventional.
0 of a person crazy or angry. of an warn
accusation without basis or foundation. warn someone off tell someone forcefully to
North American informai keep at a distance.
up against the wall in an inextricable This expression comes from horse racing.
situation; in great trouble or difficulty. Prior to 1969, the British Jockey Club had a
rule empowering it to warn someone off the 
The image here is of someone facing course, i.e. prohibit someone who had
execution by a firing squad. broken Jockey Club regulations from riding
or running horses at meetings under the
wall-to-wall of a carpet or other floor club jurisdiction.
covering fitted to cover an entire floor,
of great extent or number; allowing nounfilled space or interval, informal warpath
0 1 8 2 Sara Paretsky Indemnity Only "Why on the warpath ready and eager for
would he agree to see me? He never heard of confrontation.
me, he has wall-to-wall appointments.
The phrase originated with reference to
walls have ears used to warn someone to be ! American Indians heading towards a battle
careful what they say as people may be with an enemy.
eavesdropping, proverb
1999 Cricketer This summer, England are onwallaby the warpath against New Zealand in a four test
series.
on the wallaby or wallaby track of a
person unemployed and having no fixed
address. Australian informal wartwarts and all including features or qualities
waltz that are not appealing or attractive.informalwaltz Matilda: see MATILDA.
This expression is said to stem from awar request made by Oliver Cromwell to the
a war of nerves a struggle in which portrait painter Peter Lely: Remark all these opponents try to wear each other down by roughnesses, pimples, warts, and everything as you see me .psychological means.
a war of words a prolonged debate which is 1998 Times We painted Fayed, warts and all;
Fleet Street denounces us for not painting just
conducted by means of the spoken or the warts.
printed word.
have been in the wars have been hurt or wash
injured, informal come out in the wash be resolved eventually
a war to end all wars a war, especially the with no lasting harm, informal
First World War, regarded as making 1993 Canadian LivingWe could all benefit from
subsequent wars unnecessary. borrowing her philosophy: be cheerful and
worry sparingly. In the end, it will all come out
warm in the wash.
keep something warm for someone hold or wash your dirty linen in public discuss
occupy a place or post until another person or argue about your personal affairs in
is ready to do so. public.
make it or things warm for someone cause
This expression dates from the early 19th trouble or make things unpleasant for century in English; a similar French expression !
someone. about linge sale is attributed to Napoleon.
warm as toast pleasantly warm.
1991 W. P. Kinsella Box Socials Scrunched wash your hands of disclaim responsibility
down, warm as toast, between the cookstove for.waste 308
This phrase originally alluded to the like water off a duck back: see DUCK.
biblica escription of Pontius Pilate, who, of the first water extreme or unsurpassed of
when he was forced to condemn Jesus tokind.
death, sent for a bowl of water and ritually
washed his hands before the crowd as a sign The sense of water referred to in this
that he was innnocent of this just person expression is the quality of brilliance and
Matthew 27:24. transparency of a diamond or other gem : if a diamond or pearl is of the first water it
won wash will not be believed or accepted. possesses the greatest possible degree of
informal brilliance and transparency. In its transferred 1998 New Scientist In the end, however, this use, however, the phrase often refers to
argument won wash. : someone or something regarded as
undesirable, e.g. a bore of the first water.waste on the wagon: see WAGON.
waste not, want not if you use a commodity
or resource carefully and without water under the bridge used to refer to
extravagance you will never be in need. events or situations in the past that are
proverb no longer to be regarded as important or a
source of concern.
l this expression, want can be
understood to mean either lack or desire The related expression there been a lot 
according to the context. of water under the bridge since — is used to indicate that a lot of time has passed and a
waste of space a person perceived as useless great many events have occurred since a
particular event. A North American variant is jor incompetent, informal
water over the dam.watchwatch someone smoke: see SMOKE. Waterloo
watch this space: see SPACE. meet your Waterloo experience a final and
watch the time ensure that you are aware of decisive defeat.
the time, typically in order to avoid being : The battle of Waterloo in 1815 marked
late. the fina efeat of Napoleon army by the
watch the world go by spend time observing British and the Prussians.
other people going about their business.1996 Europe: Rough Guide Outdoor seating
allows you to watch the world go by or to play a wave
game of chess with giant chess pieces under make waves create a significant
the trees. impression, cause trouble, informal
01997 Spectator Perhaps unsurprisingly, it is
watch your step: see mind your step at STEP. the old pros disguised as new boys and girls
watch your or someone back protect who are making the biggest waves.
yourself or someone else against danger wax
from an unexpected quarter. be wax in someone hands: see be putty in
the watches of the night the hours of night, someone hands at PUTTY.
especially viewed as a time when you wax and wane undergo alternate increases
cannot sleep, literary and decreases.
A watch was originally each of the three
2002 New York Times The level of security that
or four periods of time into which the night people are psychologically able to accept
was divided, during which a guard would be changes as crisis situations wax and wane.
stationed to keep a lookout for danger or wax lyrical about: see LYRICAL.
trouble.way
have it both ways: see BOTH.water
cast your bread upon the waters: see BREAD. go out of your way make a special effort to
like water in great quantities. do something.
1991 Mark Tully No Full Stops in India Digvijay son the way out going down in status,
supporters allege that George spent money estimation, or favour; going out of fashion.
like water to bribe the local leaders. dying, informal309 welly
put someone in the way of give a person the weather
opportunity of. dated fine or lovely weather for ducks wet, rainy
the way of the world the manner in whichweather, humorous
people typically behave or things typically
happen used to express your resignation keep a weather eye on observe a situation
to it. very carefully, especially for changes or
way to go used to express pleasure, approval, developments.
or excitement. North American informal make good or bad weather of it of a ship
1990 Robert Oliver Making Champions You hadcope well or badly in a storm.
Bechard shakin. He wasn gonna mess with
you. Way to go! make heavy weather or work of have
ways and means the methods and resources unnecessary difficulty in dealing with a
at someone disposal for achieving task or problem, informal
something. In a nautical context, heavy weather
means violent wind accompanied by heavy
l the British parliamentary system this rain or rough sea. phrase is used specifically of the various under the weather Qslightly unwell, in
methods of raising government revenue. low spirits, informal
1982 Frank McGuinness The Factory Girls He
said too he couldn afford opposition and weaving
there were ways and means of gettingridof it. get weaving set briskly to work; begin
Everybody thinks there definitely going to be action. British informal
redundancies and pay-offs. 1992 George MacDonald Fraser Quartered Safe
Out Here Come on, come on, come on!... Let swayside get weaving!
fall by the wayside fail to persist in anendeavour or undertaking, be left wedge
without attention or help. the thin end of the wedge: see. In sense 1 the phrase alludes to the weigh
biblical parable of the sower in Mark 4:3-20, ;
weigh something in the balance: see
and in particular to verse 4: And it came to
pass, as he sowed, some fell by the way side, BALANCE.
and the fowls of the air came and devoured it up. weight
be a weight off your mind come as a great
relief after you have been worried.
wazoo be worth your or its weight in gold be
up or out the wazoo in great quantities. extremely useful or helpful.
informal throw your weight about: see THROW.
Wazoo is an informal American term for the buttocks or anus. Its origins are unknown, welcome
welcome to the club: see join the club at
2000 Eric Garcia Anonymous Rex The guy in the
movie had business contacts up the wazoo. CLUB.
outstay your welcome stay as a visitor longerweak than you are wanted.
weak at the knees: see KNEE.
the weak link the point at which a system,
welkinsequence, or organization is most make the welkin ring make a very loud
vulnerable; the least dependable element sound.
or member. Welkin is a poetic term for the sky or
heaven , which is now found only in literary !
wear contexts and in this expression.
wear your heart on your sleeve: see HEART.
wear the trousers: see TROUSERS. welly
wear or wear your years well remain give it some welly exert more effort or
young-looking. strength, informalwest 310
Welly or wellie, an informal abbreviation wham-bam
of Wellington boot, acquired an informal
sense of power or vigour in the 1970s.
wham-bam-thank-you-ma am used in
reference to sexual activity conducted
1997 BBC Top Gear Magazine Drop down a gear, roughly and quickly, without tenderness.
give it some welly and that long bonnet rises
towards the horizon in the best traditions whatof... a traditional British Sports Car.
and or or what have you and or or
west anything else similar, informal
go west be killed or lost; meet with disaster. 1997 Jonathan Coe The House of Sleep Most of
the time he out there, risking his life for his
British informal
country and defeating Communism and
The image here is of the sun setting in the what have you.
west at the end of the day. and what not and other similar things.
informalwet 1992 Nalinaksha Bhattacharya Hem b Football
Has anyone ever seen such a selfish daughter?
all wet mistaken; completely wrong. North Gorging herself on eggs, milk and what not
American while others in the house don even get two
wet the baby head celebrate a baby birth square meals?
with a drink, usually an alcoholic one. British know what what: see K. informal what with because of used typically to
wet behind the ears lacking experience;
introduce several causes of something.immature, informal
1990 Rosamund Clay Only Angels Forget She  
O The image is of a baby or young animal
had a difficult life, what with my father
j which is stil amp after it has been born. skiving off when was three and leaving her
without a penny.
a wet blanket someone who has a depressing
or discouraging effect on others. wheat
separate or sort the wheat from the chaff
A dampened blanket can be used to distinguish valuable people or things from
smother a fire; the image here is of a person worthless ones.extinguishing a lively or optimistic mood by their gloominess or negativity. Chaff is the husks of corn or other seed
separated out when the grain is winnowed
1991 Michael Curtin The Plastic Tomato Cutter or threshed. The metaphorical contrast
When in the company of those of us who do between wheat and chaff is drawn in several
succumb to the occasiona ram Father Willie passages in the Bible, for example in
was never a wet blanket. Matthew 3:12: he will thoroughly purge his
wet your whistle have a drink, informal floor, and gather his wheat into the garner;
but he will burn up the chaff with
whack unquenchable fire. out of whack out of order; not working. North
American & Australian
1998 Bookseller There been a fair amount of wheel
eering... at the Sunday Times for getting its a big wheel: see a b g cheese at B G. figures so comprehensively out of whack, by a reinvent the wheel: see N. factor of about 100 if memory serves. grease the wheels: see G A S. top or full whack the maximum price or silly as a wheel very silly. Australian
rate.1985 John Clanchy The Lie of the Land Father
1989 Holiday Which? Tour prices vary; you pay Tierney was mad. Cracked as an egg, some
top whack if you book in large hotels. boys said, silly as a wheel.
whale spin your wheels waste your time or efforts.
a whale of a — an extremely good example North American informal
of a particular thing, informal 2001 Time As long as our national energy
1993 Chicago Tribune This stuffed-shirt policy is demand-driven... we will continue to
epitome of the East Coast Establishment of spin our wheels.
his day had a whale of a time at Chicago wheel and deal engage in commercial or
World Fair. political scheming.311 white
The verb wheel is here used to mean clean as a whistle: see A. control events. The sense is related to the wet your whistle: see. noun a big wheel, meaning an important
person who makes things happen. whistle in the dark pretend to be confident
or unafraid.
the wheel of Fortune the wheel which the 1996 Bernard Connolly The Rotten Heart of
goddess Fortune is said to turn as a symbol Europe Swedish authorities had, whistling in
of random luck or change. the dark, spoken of ERM association —butnothing had come of it.
wheels within wheels used to indicate
that a situation is complicated and affected whistle in the wind try unsuccessfully to
by secret or indirect influences. influence something that cannot bechanged.
The image here is of the cogs found in
whistle something the wind let! pieces of intricate machinery.
something go; abandon something.
OThisphrasecomesfromfalconry.lt
whip originally referred to the action of letting a
a fair crack of the whip: see A K. trained hawk loose by casting it off with the wind instead of against the wind in pursuit of whip the cat a or moan. b e
prey.sorry; show remorse. Australian & New Zealandinformal
whips of large quantities of. Australian & NewwhiteZealandbig white chief: see. whirl bleed white: see b e
give it a whirl give it a try. informa at B. 
1979 Snoo Wilson A Greenish Man You ve mark something with a white stone
nothing to lose. Give it a whirl, try it for a regard something as especially fortunate
month. or happy.
whirlwind In ancient times a white stone wastraditionally used as a memorial of a happy
reap the whirlwind suffer seriousevent.
consequences as a result of your actions.
 the white feather appear cowardly.
This expression alludes to the proverb
they that sow the wind shall reap the British, dated
whirlwind, which is taken from Hosea 8:7.A white feather in a game bird tail was 1998 Spectator A political party that thought considered to be an indication of bad
all it had to do to keep Scotland happy was breeding.
deliver devolution is instead reaping the
whirlwind it sowed in the Eighties. a white elephant a possession that is useless
or troublesome, especially one that iswhisker expensive to maintain or difficult to
have or have grown whiskers especially of dispose of.a story be very old. informal
In former times, the rare albino elephant within a whisker of extremely close or near was regarded as holy. It was highly prized by
to doing, achieving, or suffering some- the kings of Siam now Thailand and its
thing, informal upkeep was extremely expensive. It was
apparently the practice for a king of Siam to Igive one of the elephants to a courtier they whistle disliked: the unfortunate recipient would
blow the whistle on bring an illicit activity to usually be financially ruined by the attempt
and end by informing on the person to maintain the animal.
responsible, informal
a white knight a company that makes a
T idiom comes from football, in which welcome bid for a company facing an
the referee blows a whistle to indicate that a player has broken the rules. Those whounwelcome takeover bid.
inform on others engaged in an illicit activity The image here is of the traditional figure !
are now referred to as whistle-blowers. from chivalric romances, who rides to the
whited 312rescue of someone in danger. See also a knight in shining armour at KNIGHT.wick
dip your wick of a man have sexual inter course, vulgar slang
whited get on someone wick annoy someone.
a whited sepulchre a hypocrite; someone British informal
who is ostensibly virtuous but inwardly
corrupt, literary wicked
This expression comes from Matthew no peace or rest for the wicked someone  
23:27: Woe unto you ... for ye are like unto heavy workload or lack of tranquillity is
whited sepulchres, which indeed appear punishment for a sinful life, humorous
beautiful outward, but are within full of
dead men bones, and of all uncleanness. expression come from Isaiah 48:22:
A sepulchre is a room or monument, cut in There is no peace, saith the Lord, unto the
rock or built of stone, in which a dead body is wicked. laid or buried.wicket
whiter a sticky wicket a pitch that has been
whiter than white extremely white. drying out after rain and is therefore
morally beyond reproach. difficult to bat on. Cricket a tricky or
awkward situation, informalwhowho goes there?: see GOES. wide
give a wide berth to: see BERTH.whole
go the whole hog: see HOG. widow
out of the whole cloth wholly fabricated; a widow cruse an apparently small supply
with no basis in fact or reality. North American that proves inexhaustible.
informal
1991 Ron Rosenbaum Travels with Dr. Death In the Bible, 1 Kings 17 tells the story of
The fact that her murder is officially the widow to whom Elijah was sent for
unsolved is irritating, yes, but not sustenance. When he asked her for bread, she :
ustification for creating conspiracy theories replied that all she had for herself andherson ;
out of the whole cloth. was an handful of meal in a barrel and a little !
oil in a cruse a cruse was a small earthen a whole new ball game: see BALL. ware pot or jar. Elijah told herto make him a
the whole nine yards everything possible or cake from these ingredients and then to
make food for herself and her son as God had 
available. North American informaldecreed that the containers should be
1999 Salman Rushdie The Ground Beneath Her continually replenished.
Feet Then the lovers throw a party, and what a
party! Dancing, wine, the whole nine yards. a widow mite a small monetary
contribution from someone who is poor.whoop
This phrase comes from a story recounted
whoop it up enjoy yourself or celebrate in Mark 12:41-4. A poor widow donated two :
in a noisy way, usually in a group. create mites coins of very low value to the treasury or show excitement or enthusiasm. US of the Temple in Jerusalem, a sum which
informal constituted all the money she possessed,
Witnessingthisact, Jesus told his disciplesthat ;
she had given more than the richest contri whoopee butor because she had given all that she had.
make whoopee celebrate wildly, make
love, informalwig
why flip your wig: see flip your lid at FLIP.
the whys and wherefores the reasons for or wigs on the green violent or unpleasant
details of something. developments; ructions.
1991 Gramophone At this time was desperate
to know all the whys and wherefores of a The image here is of wigs becoming
dislodged or being pulled off during a brawl, ireally advanced technique.
313 wind
1996 Frank McCourt Angela Ashes Mam 0 1 9 6 Guardian We re pursuing that old will
threatens us from the bed that we re to help the wisp, Pacific Rim cooking, again.
our small brother. She says, If ye don tfixyeer with the best will in the world however good
brother shoes an have to get out of this bed
your intentions used to imply that success
there will be wigs on the green.in a particular undertaking, although
wiggle desired, is unlikely.
with a will energetically and resolutely.
get a wiggle on get moving; hurry, informal
1984 Bernard MacLaverty Ca unlop told Cal
wild to muck out the byre and because it was
something he could do he went at it with a will.sow your wild oats: see OAT.
wild and woolly uncouth in appearance or willow
behaviour. wear the green willow grieve for the loss
of a loved one. suffer unrequited love.
This phrase was originally applied to the literary
American West. The adjective woolly
probably refers to sheepskin clothing worn : A willow branch or leaves traditionally
with the wool still attached to it, seen as symbolized grief or unrequited love. In
characteristic clothing of the pioneers and Othello, Desdemona sings the mournful
cowboys who opened up the western US. willow song , about a maid forsaken by her lover, shortly before she is murdered.
wildernessa voice in the wilderness: see VOICE. win
win the day: see carry the day at DAY.
wildfire win by a neck: see NECK.
spread like wildfire spread with great speed. win or earn your spurs gain your first
wild goose distinction or honours, informal
a wild goose chase a foolish and hopeless In the Middle Ages a knight who had won 
search for or pursuit of something his spurs had attained knighthood by
unattainable. performing an act of bravery: a pair of gilt
spurs were the distinguishing mark of a
This expression is first recorded in the late knight.
16th century. It was then the term for a kind of equestrian sport in which all the win the wooden spoon: see SPOON.
competitors had to follow accurately the you can win them all or win some, lose
course of the leader at definite intervals, like some said to express consolation or
a flight of wild geese. Later, the term wasresignation after failure in a contest, informal
applied to an erratic course taken by one
person or thing and followed by another.
wind
1998 Spectator The struggle to align the clock between wind and water at a vulnerable
and the heavens , then, is ultimately the story point.
of mortal vanity, or at least a wild goose chase.This is a nautical metaphor referring to
will the part of a ship side near the waterline
that is sometimes above the water and
where there a will there a way sometimes submerged; damage to the ship at
determination will overcome any obstacle. this level is particularly dangerous. The
proverb phrase is first recorded in its literal sense at
the time of the Spanish Armada 1588: One
This f f the saying was quoted by of the shot was betweenethe windeandthe !
William Hazlitt in 1822, but George Herbert water,whereoftheythoughtshewouldhaue recorded a variant as one of his Outlandish sonke. By the mid 17th century, it was also
Proverbs in 1640: To him that will, wais are being used of people.
not wanting.1967 Michael Gilbert The Dust and the Heat
will the wisp Qa phosphorescent light Mallinson must have guessed what was
seen hovering or floating over marshy coming. Nevertheless, it hit him between
ground, perhaps due to the combustion of wind and water.
methane. an elusive or deceptive person, get wind of begin to suspect that something
idea, or goal. is happening; hear a rumour of. informal
windmill 314
gone with the wind gone completely; mill act recklessly or unconventionally.
having disappeared without trace. dated
1933 John Galsworthy One More River suggest
This expression comes from Ernest that both of you felt it would be mad to fling
Dowson poem Cynara 1896: haveyour caps over the windmill like that?
forgot much, Cynara, gone with the wind ,
but it is best known as the title of Margaret tilt at windmills: see TILT.
Mitchell 1936 novel about the American
Civil War. windowgo out of the window of a plan or pattern
it an ill wind few things are so bad that no of behaviour no longer exist; disappear.
one profits from them, proverb
informal
The full form of this nautical saying is it 1998 Economist In the ensuing struggle
an ill wind that blows nobody any good or between the two groups of councillors , the
that profits nobody. Recorded since the mid public interest goes out of the window.
16th century, it is used especially as a comment window of opportunity a favourable
on a situation in which one person bad luck
opportunity for doing something that must
is the cause of another good fortune.be seized immediately if it is not to be
put or have the wind up alarm or frighten missed.
or be alarmed or frightened. British informal window of vulnerability an opportunity to
attack something that is at risk.
One of the earliest recorded uses of this
expression was in a letter from the poet This expression is especially associated
Wilfred Owen in 1918: Shells so close that with a cold-war claim that America land they thoroughly put the wind up a Life based missiles were easy targets for a Soviet
Guardsman in the trench with me. first strike.
raise the wind: see RAISE.
sail close to or near the wind verge on windward
indecency, dishonesty, or disaster, informal to windward of in an advantageous position
in relation to. dated
This originated as a nautical expression,
meaning sail as nearly against the wind as is wine
possible. It has been in figurative use since new wine in old bottles something new or
the mid 19th century.
innovatory added to an existing or
1996 Martin Dove How To Win Any Consumer established system or organization.
Competition like the extra thrill of writing to a
tight deadline but sometimes do sail a bit The proverb you can put new wine into 
close to the wind with closing dates. old bottles is a reference to Matthew 9:17:
Neither do men put new wine into old
take the wind out of someone sails bottles: else the bottles break, and the wine frustrate a person by unexpectedly runneth out, and the bottles perish. anticipating an action or remark.
1977 Eva Figes Nelly Version She could so wine and dine someone entertain someone
easily have taken the wind out of my sails and by offering them drinks or a meal.
put me in my place for good. wine, women, and song the hedonistic life
to the winds or the four winds all of drinking, sexual pleasure, and carefree
directions, so as to be abandoned or entertainment proverbially required by
neglected. men.0 1 9 5 Kate Atkinson Behind the Scenes at
the Museum My little flock scatters to the four wing
winds and are hugged and congratulated by in the wings ready to do something or to be
their respective parents for being so pretty,used at the appropriate time.
charming, cute, delightful, and so on.
wind someone round your little finger: see This idiom comes from the theatre, in
twist someone round your little finger at which the wings here are the areas screened from public view where actors wait for their jFINGER.cue to come on stage.
windmill on a wing and a prayer with only the
fling or throw your cap over the wind- slightest chance of success.
315 wish
This expression comes from the title of a get your wires crossed: see CROSSED.
1943 song by the American songwriter under the wire at the last possible
Harold Adamson, Comin in on a Wing and
a Prayer. He himself took it from a opportunity, just before a time limit. North
American informalcontemporary comment made by a wartime
pilot speaking to ground control before
making an emergency landing. wisdom
in someone wisdom used ironically to
spread or stretch or try your wings extend suggest that an action is not well judged.
your activities and interests or start new 1992 Rugby World b Post In their wisdom
ones. Ciaran Fitzgerald and his selectors decided to
under your wing in or into your protective dispense with the incumbent, Rob Saunders,
care. and bring Aherne back for his thirteenth Irish
1991 Mickey Mantle My Favorite Summer He cap.
kind of took me under his wing and showedme the ropes in myfirstyear. wise
be wise after the event understand and
winged assess an event or situation only after its
winged words highly significant or apposite implications have become obvious.
words, literary The French version of this expression can be traced back to the late 15th century: the
The image, taken from Homer Iliad, is of chronicler Philippe de Commynes used thethe words travelling as directly as arrows to
phrase saiges après le coup in his Mémoires,
their intended target.
remarking of it comme on dit des Bretons as the Bretons say.wink
forty winks: see F Y. put someone wise give someone important
information, informal
in the wink of an eye or in a wink y
1950 Graham Greene The Third Man He was a
quickly. year older and knew the ropes. He put me wise
not sleep or get a wink or not get a wink to a lot of things.
of sleep not sleep at all. a wise man of Gotham a foolish person.datedwinking
as easy as winking very easy or easily, informal Gotham is a village in Nottinghamshire
which is associated with the folk story The Wise Men of Gotham, in which the
wipe inhabitants of the village demonstrate their wipe someone eye get the better of a cunning by feigning stupidity. Gotham is now a nickname for New York City, used
person. British informal, datedoriginally by Washington Irvine but later
wipe the floor with inflict a humiliating linked particularly with the Batman
defeat on. informal stories.
wipe the slate clean forgive or forget
past faults or offences; make a fresh start. wiser
In former times, shopkeepers and pub be none or not any the wiser know no
landlords would keep a record of what wasowing to them by writing the details on a
more than before.
tablet of slate; a clean slate was one on which no debts were recorded. wishif wishes were horses, beggars ride f
you could achieve your aims simply by
wire wishing for them, life would be very easy.
down to the wire used to denote a situation proverb
whose outcome is not decided until the
very last minute, informal This expression was first recorded in the
early 17th century as a Scottish proverb.This expression comes from horse racing
and originated in North America, where a the wish is father to the thought we
wire is stretched across and above the believe a thing because we wish it to be
finishing line on a racecourse.true.wit 316O This expression is used by Shakespeare in 2 wolf
Henry IV: Thy wish was father, Harry, to that thought. However, observations on this kind :
cry wolf call for help when it is not needed;
of self-delusion are found in much earlier raise a false alarm.
writings, including those of Julius Caesar and !
An old fable tells the tale of a shepherdDemosthenes.
boy who constantly raised false alarms with
1980 Alice Thomas Ellis The Birds of the Air cries of Wolf! , until people no longer took
Somewhere in that area of the human mind any notice of him. When a wolf did actually
where the wish is father to the thought appearand attack him, his genuine cries
activity was taking place. Hunter, Barbara for help were ignored and no one came to his decided, had wangled this invitation in order aid-to be with her.
have or hold a wolf by the ears be a
wit precarious position.
be at your wits end be overwhelmed with The saying became current in English in
difficulties and at a loss as to what to do the mid 16th century, but the Roman comic
next. dramatist Terence 195-159 BC mentions its
Latin equivalent, lupum auribus tenere, as
be frightened or scared out of your wits be already being an old saying in his time.
extremely frightened. Compare with have a tiger by the tail
gather or collect your wits bring yourself at TIGER.
back to a state of equanimity.
1984 Géraldine McCaughrean The Canterbury 1990 George Will Suddenly A Communist Party
administering an economy is holding a wolf
Tales Poor old man, he was too astonishedby the ears.
to speak. And before he could collect his
wits, he was sitting at table... with his keep the wolf from the door have enough
lord on one side and his daughter on the other. money to avert hunger or starvation.
have or keep your wits about you be The phrase has been used in this sense
constantly alert and vigilant. since the mid 16th century, but the image of live by your wits earn money by clever and the wolf as a symbol of a devouring and
destructive force is found much earlier
sometimes dishonest means, having no
than this. In Matthew 10:16, for example,
regular occupation. esus tells his disciples: Behold send you
pit your wits against compete with someone forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be ye
or something. therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as
1996 Earl Lovelace Salt Michael... would be doves. the one to make money... there was no
greater cause or adversary to pit his wits and throw someone to the wolves leave
slickness and spite against. someone to be roughly treated or criticized
without trying to help or defend them.
witching informalthe witching hour midnight.
This phrase probably arose in reference to In Shakespeare Hamlet, Hamlet tales about packs of wolves pursuing
declares: Tis now the very witching time of travellers in horse-drawn sleighs, in which
night, When churchyards yawn and hell itself one person was pushed offthesleigh to allow breathes out contagion to this world. He is ittogofaster.soenablingtheotherstomake referring to the popular superstition that their escape.
witches and other supernatural powers areactive at midnight.
1958 Listener This able and agreeable doctorwas thrown to the wolves by a Prime Minister
who had good reason to know that his own
position was desperate.wither
wither on the vine fail to be implemented or a wolf in sheep clothing a person or thing
dealt with because of neglect or inaction. that appears friendly or harmless but is
really hostile and dangerous.O The image of grapes failing to grow is
probably a reference to various passages in This expression comes from Jesus words the Bible in which a withered vine is used as a in Matthew 7:15: Beware of false prophets,
metaphor for a state of physical or spiritual which come to you in sheep clothing, but
impoverishment. inwardly they are ravening wolves .317 word
take someone to the woodshed reprove or
woman punish someone, especially discreetly. US
a woman of letters: see a man of letters at informal, dated
LETTER.
a woman of the world: see a man of the This expression referred to the former
world at WORLD. practice of taking a naughty child to a
woodshed to be punished, out of sight of
wonder other people.
a nine days wonder something that attracts
enthusiastic interest for a short while but is
then ignored or forgotten. woodwork
work or do wonders have a very beneficial vanish into or come or crawl out of the
effect on someone or something. woodwork of an unpleasant person or
1997 Paul Wilson Calm at Work While it is true thing disappear into or emerge from
that holidays work wonders for the relief of obscurity, informal
stress, the relief is only temporary.The implication here is that the people or things concerned are like cockroaches or
wood other unpleasant creatures living in the
cannot see the wood for the trees fail crevices of skirting boards and cupboards.
to grasp the main issue because of over-attention to details.wool
The North American version of this
expression is cannot see the forest for the
all wool and a yard wide of excellent quality;
trees. thoroughly sound.
Literally, this expression refers to cloth of out of the wood or woods out of danger or the finest quality.difficulty.
1974 Anthony Gilbert A Nice Little Killing No one
A proverbial warning against hallooing will ever catch her... with an alibi all wool and
before you are out of the wood dates froma yard wide. the late 18th century.
pull the wool over someone eyes deceive
touch wood said in order to prevent a someone, especially by telling untruths.
confident statement from bringing bad 1997 Spectator On no occasion do remember
luck. Ridsdale trying to pull the wool over my eyes
but rather trying always to remove the wool
A North American variant is knock on that journalists... pull over their own eyes.
wood. The phrase refers to the traditional
custom of touching something wooden to
avert possible bad luck.
eat your words: see EAT.
1991 Rohinton Mistry Such a Long Journey have a word in someone ear speak to
Sohrab and Gustad did not shout or argue like
someone privately and discreetly, usuallythey used to, touch wood.
to give them a warning, informalwooden in words of one syllable: see SYLLABLE.
accept a wooden nickel: see NICKEL. a man or woman of few words a taciturn
win the wooden spoon: see SPOON.person.
wooden nutmeg: see NUTMEG.
a man or a of his or her a
woodshed person who keeps the promises that theysomething nasty in the a make.
shocking or distasteful thing kept secret.
not the word for it not an adequate orBritish informal
appropriate description.
This expression is taken from Stella 1992 European Travel & Life The landscape of
Gibbons comic novel Cold Comfort Farm Alaska has the power to overwhelm.
1933, in which Aunt Ada Doom sdominance Beautiful is not the word for it.
over her family is maintained by constant put into : see
references to her having seen something MOUTH.
nasty in the woodshed in her youth. The someone word is law someone must be
details of the experience are never explained, obeyed without question.
work 318
someone word is their bond someone work your ass or butt off work extremely
keeps their promises. hard. North American vulgar slang

A variant of this expression, now rather work your fingers to the bone: see BONE.
dated, is an Englishman word is his bond. work like a beaver: see BEAVER.
work to rule especially as a form oftake someone at their word interpret a
industrial action follow official working
person words literally or exactly,regulations exactly in order to reduce
especially by believing them or doing as
output and efficiency, chiefly Britishthey suggest.work your ticket: see TICKET.
take someone word for it believe what
someone says or writes without checking workmanfor yourself.
a bad workman blames his tools someone
too — for words extremely —. informal who has done something badly will
1990 Rosamund Pilcher September seek to lay the blame on the equipment
not saying Isn it beautiful all the time, rather than admit to their own lack of
because if do, it ll just sound too banal for skill, proverb
words.
winged words: see WINGED. A similar 13th-century French proverb
observed mauveés ovriers ne troveraja bon 
word of mouth spoken language; informal : hostill, bad workmen will never find a good ;
or unofficia iscourse. tool , and variants of this early saying can be 1987 Bruce Duffy The World As Found It His found in English until the mid 19th century
ideas were repeated by word of mouth or until the emergence of the modern version.
passed around as transcripts of the shorthand
notes that his students doggedly took down
during his lectures. world
the word on the street a rumour or piece of the best of both or all possible worlds the
information currently being circulated. benefits of widely differing situations,
informal enjoyed at the same time.
1992 Victor Headley Yardie The word on The variant all possible worlds alludes to
the street was that Roy was hooked and the catchphrase of the eternally optimistic
had smoked a fair amount of the crack philosopher Dr Pangloss in Voltaire Candide 
himself. 1759: Dans ce meilleur des mondes
a word to the wise a hint or brief possibles... toutestaumieux, usuallyquoted
in English as Everything is for the best in the explanation given, that being all that is
best of all possible worlds. required.
The equivalent Latin phrase is verbum carry the world before you have rapid and
sapientisatesta word to the wise is enough; complete success.
the abbreviation of this, verb, sap., iscome up in the world rise in status,
sometimes used in English.especially by becoming richer.
1983 Penelope Lively Perfect Happiness A word go down in the world drop in status,
to the wise. If you don know the place especially by becoming poorer.
told the thing to do is steer clear of the guided look for all the world like look precisely like.
tours.
1993 New Scientist Fossil imprints that look for
all the world like motorcycle tracks have been
work explained.
give someone the works Ogive someone
a man or woman of the world a personeverything, treat someone harshly.
who is experienced and practical in human
informalaffairs.
have your work cut out be faced with a hard not be long for this world: see LONG.
task. out of this world extremely enjoyable or
in the works being planned, worked on, or impressive, informal
produced, chiefly North American 1995 Daily Express thought the rest of the
2003 N. Y. Magazine Movie-star-of-the-moment team, and especially the defence, were out of
ennifer Lopez... is in talks to star in Monster in
this world.Law, a new comedy in the works at New Line
Cinema. set the world alight: see ALIGHT.319 wring
think the world of have a very high regard so much the worse for used to suggest that a
for. problem, failure, or other unfortunate
event or situation is the fault of a person
the world and his wife everyone; a large specified and that the speaker does not feel
number of people. British any great concern about it.
This expression is first recorded inJonathan Swift Polite Conversation 1738.
the worse for wear damaged by use or
weather over time; battered and shabby,
the world, the flesh, and the devil all forms of a person feeling rather unwell,
of temptation to sin. especially as a result of drinking too much
the world is your oyster you are in a position alcohol, informal
to take the opportunities that life has to
offer. worst
be your own worst enemy: see ENEMY.
This expression may come from
Shakespeare The Merry Wives of Windsor. do your worst do as much damage as you can
Why, then the world mine oyster, Which often used to express defiance in the face
with sword will open. of threats.
1998 Times was never brought up thinking, get or have the worst of it be in the least
You are an Asian woman so you can do advantageous or successful position; suffer
things. was always given the impression that the most.
the world was my oyster. if the worst comes to the worst if the most
a or the world of a very great deal of. serious or difficult circumstances arise.
worm worth
a worm  -eye view the view looking up at be worth your weight in gold: see WEIGHT.
something from ground level. for all someone is worth as energetically
This expression was formed on the or enthusiastically as someone can. so as
pattern of bird  -eye view see BIRD. It to obtain everything you can from some usually refers to the viewpoint of a humble or one, informal
insignificant person who is witnessing 01995 Kate Atkinson Behind the Scenes at the
important events or people. Museum In the kitchen, Brian, Adrian lover, is
wearing Bunty pink rubber gloves and
even a worm will turn even a meek person washing up for all he worth.
will resist or retaliate if pushed too far.proverb not worth a plugged nickel: see NICKEL.
food for worms a dead person. worth your salt: see SALT.
wormwood wrap
wormwood and gall a source of bitter keep something under wraps conceal
mortification and grief, literary or be secretive about something.
Gall is bile, a substance secreted by the
informal
liver and proverbial for its bitterness, while 1998 New Scientist The key to the fuel is a
wormwood is an aromatic plant with a bitter catalyst that the Navy is keeping under
taste. The expression originated in reference wraps.
to various passages in the Bible, for example wrap someone round your little finger: see
Lamentations 3:19: Remembering mine
twist someone round your little finger ataffliction and my misery, the wormwood and
FINGER.the gall. w a it up be quiet. British informalworse wring
none the worse for not adversely affected
by. not to be considered inferior on wring someone withers stir someone  
account of. emotions or conscience.
01991 Alistair Campbell Sidewinder Two This phrase is taken from Hamlet. In the
days have passed, and am up and about, play-within-the-play scene, Hamlet remarks
feeling none the worse for my attack of ironically that there is no need for King
sunstroke.wringer 320
Claudius, his usurping uncle, to feel troubled This phrase comes from the biblical story by the plot, remarking: let the galled jade of Belshazzar feast, at which a disembodied wince, our withers are unwrung. The withers hand appeared and wrote a message on
are the bony ridge between the shoulders of the wall foretelling the fall of the
a horse which is liable to be chafed by an ill- Babylonian kingdom to the Medes and
fitting saddle. Persians Daniel 5:5, 25-8. A North
American variant is the handwriting is on
wring your hands show great distress. the wall.
wringer 1998 Spectator We ought to have spotted
put someone through the wringer or the the writing on the wall when the dear
old Ministry of Works became English
mangle subject someone to a very Heritage , packaging the past as a set of
stressful experience, especially a severe limited-edition, special-offer collectables.
interrogation, informal
1984 Louise Erdrich Love Medicine saw that
he had gone through the wringer. He was red- written
eyed, gaunt, and he was drunk. be or have something written all over
your face used to convey that the
wrinkle presence of a particular quality or feeling
iron out the wrinkles: see N. is clearly revealed by a person expression.
informalwritwrit large clear and obvious. wrongO Tne
literal sense of written in large born on the g side of the blanket: see
characters has long fallen out of use. As BLANKET.
the past participle of write, writ has been get in g with or on the wrong side of
superseded by written except in this phrase n the dislike or disapproval
and analogous phrases such as writ small.of someone, informal
1994 Time Voters fear the future, which looks get out of bed on the wrong side: see B. to them like the present writ large: more
concern about crime, more economic get someone wrong misunderstand some pressure on their families, more of that one, especially by falsely imputing malice
unnerving sound of something eating away at to them.
the edges of their lives. get hold of the wrong end of the stick
your writ runs you have authority of a misunderstand someone or something
specified extent or kind. completely.go down the wrong way of food enter the
write windpipe instead of the gullet.
nothing to write home about of little in the wrong box: see BOX.
interest or value, informal
1970 Nina Bawden The Birds on the Trees the g side of the tracks: see A K. daresay what did was nothing to writehome about, but it put food in her belly and wrote
shoes on her feet!and that all she wrote used to convey
write ticket: see K T. that there is or was nothing more to
be said about a matter. North American
writing informal
the writing is on the wall there are clear 2001 Chicago Tribune The snap was a little
signs that something unpleasant or high, and... tilted up for a second and that  
unwelcome is going to happen. all she wrote... took my eye off the ball.Yyyard yes
by the yard in large numbers or quantities. yes and no partly and partly not.
2002 Guardian Culture became a 1981 Brian Murphy The Enigma Variations Do
commodity: painters sold landscapes cut up you believe that if you continue seeing me
by the foot for home decoration; booksellers you ll be damned? Yes and no. 
offered books by the yard; publishers traded
copyrights.yesterdayyarn yesterday man a man, especially a
politician, whose career is finished or
spin a yarn tell a story, especially a long and
past its peak.complicated one.
yesterday news a person or thing that is no
Ayarn is one ofthe long fibresfrom which longer of interest.
a rope is made. The expression is nautical in
origin and has been used in this figurative
sense since the early 19th century. yonder
the wide blue yonder: see BLUE.yearfor donkey years: see DONKEY. you
you and yours you together with your family
put years on or take years off someone and close friends.
make someone feel or look older or 1937 American Home So it natural... to take
younger. good care ofthe home that gives you and yours
the vale of years: see VALE. this steadfast protection.
the year dot: see DOT.Index
This section contains groups of idioms which are linked by a common
theme or subject. The themes are listed in alphabetical order and the word
in bold print indicates where individual idioms may be found in the
dictionary itself. For example, the idiom take the plunge is listed in the
dictionary at the main entry plunge.
Action have one foot in the grave
start the ball rolling full of years
get the bit between your teeth ancient or old as the hills
at the coalface over the hillget cracking have had a good innings
go for the doctor on your last legs
get or pull your finger out long in the tooth
keep your nose to the grindstone pass your sell-by date
past ithammer and tongssecond childhood
hit the ground running
stricken in yearshot to trot
threescore years and tenhave many irons in the firethere many a good tune played on an
rest on your laurelslead from the front old fiddle
the vale of yearsput your money where your mouth isput years on someone
rest on your oars
put your hand to the ploughtake the plunge Ambitionpress the button think big
roll up your sleeves bite off more than you can chew
set the wheels in motion fire in the belly
shake a leg fly high
put your shoulder to the wheel punch above your weight
get the show on the road room at the top
watch someone smoke try to run before you can walk
stir your stumps set your heart on
strike while the iron is hot raise your sights
get weaving set your sights onno peace for the wicked reach for the stars
punch your ticket
Ageout of the ark Anger and annoyance
have seen better days bent out of shape
the bloom is off the rose get off your bike
you can teach an old dog new tricks make your blood boil
there no fool like an old fool blow your topIndex
have a cob on on thornscount to ten meet trouble halfway
have a cow twist in the wind
go crook be a weight off your mind
get your dander upgive someone the hairy eyeball Appearance
breathe fire the acceptable face of
fit to be tied someone bark is worse than their bite
flip your lid bells and whistles
fly off the handle borrowed plumes
froth or foam at the mouth look as if butter wouldn melt in your
blow a gasket mouth
make someone hackles rise all cats are grey in the dark
hot under the collar like something the cat brought in
have your monkey up the cut of someone jibdo your nana dressed like a dog dinner
go non-linear a false dawnput someone nose out of joint fool gold
do your nut be all fur coat and no knickers
get on someone quince take the gilt off the gingerbread
give someone the pip all that glitters is not gold
lose your rag handsome is as handsome does
rattle someone cage mutton dressed as lamba red rag to a bull a paper tiger
see red pass in a crowdgo through the roof like peas in a pod
rub someone up the wrong way a Potemkin village
keep your shirt on under the skingo spare be the spit ofspit blood still waters run deep
vent your spleen
have steam coming out of your ears Argument and conflict
get on someone wick agree to differapple of discord
Anxiety and worry battle of the giants
screaming abdabs a bone of contention
bag or bundle of nerves have a bone to pick with someone
with bated breath fight like cat and dog
hot and bothered chop logic
have butterflies in your stomach at cross purposes
have a cadenza cross swords
like a cat on a hot tin roof take up the cudgels
have your heart in your mouth cut and thrust
like a hen with one chick at daggers drawn
having kittens play devil advocatelike a monkey on a stick divide and rule
live on your nerves add fuel to the fire
on pins and needles lock hornssweat blood at loggerheads
sweat bullets go to the maton tenterhooks passage of arms325 Index
pour oil on troubled waters bleed someone dry
part brass rags with take someone to the cleaners
hold the ring cook the booksa running battle with your hand in the cookie jar
shoot it out dirty work at the crossroads
sparks fly grease someone palm
be at each others throats feather your own nest
fight tooth and nail on the fiddle
trail your coat line your pockets
try a fall with every man has his price
a war of nerves put in the nipson the warpath rob someone blind
wigs on the green salt the booksstick to someone fingersBeauty sticky fingers
the body beautiful keep someone sweetbelle of the ball on the take
easy on the eye have your fingers in the till
plain Jane
no oil painting Caution
peaches and cream belt and braces
be or look a picture better safe than sorry
plain as a pikestaff a bird in the hand
not just a pretty face see which way the cat jumps
pretty as a picturethrow caution to the windsa sight for sore eyes
dip your toe in somethingan ugly duckling
discretion is the better part of valour
don put all your eggs in one basket
Boastfulness and conceit lower your guardabove yourself look before you leap
talk big steer a middle coursetoo big for your boots play it safe
little tin god to be on the safe side
be all hat and no cattle let sleeping dogs lie
turn someone head a stitch in time
hide your light under a bushel one swallow doesn make a summer
blow your own horn think twicedraw the longbow walk on eggs or eggshells
be all mouth and no trousersdrop names Certainty
pride goes before a fall an article of faith
shoot a line you can bet your boots
shoot your mouth off a safe bet
have a swollen head a bird in the hand
have tickets on yourself in your bones
blow your own trumpet should cocoa
count your chickens
Bribery, corruption, and be dollars to doughnuts that
extortion a Dutchmanput the bite on gospel truth326
all Lombard Street to a China orange out of joint
put your money on out of kilter
no two ways about it all over the lot
lay odds raise a dust
open-and-shut rock the boatput your shirt on come apart at the seams
as sure as eggs is eggs shipshape and Bristol fashion
all over the shop
Change be lost in the shuffle
the boot is on the other foot at sixes and sevens
a breath of fresh aira new broom
Classring the changes tug your forelock
chop and change keep up with the Jonesescross the floor downwardly or upwardly mobile
future shock as common as muck
don change horses in midstream one nation
Jekyll and Hyde noblesse oblige
turn over a new leaf born to the purple
a leopard can change his spots sit below the salt
the law of the Medes and the Persians be born with a silver spoon in your
break the mould mouth
a tall poppypoacher turned gamekeeper
the wrong side of the tracksrise from the ashesthe great unwashed
rite of passagethe upper crustturn the scalesshuffle the cards
sing a different tune or songClothes
be carved or set in stone your best bib and tucker
dressed to killturn the tablesdressed up like a dog dinner
trim your sailsfine feathersvariety is the spice of lifein your glad rags
new wine in old bottlesfit like a gloveChaos and disorder in full figmutton dressed as lamb
alarms and excursions
off the pegupset the apple cart
in full rigraise Cainshoot your cuffs
put the cat among the pigeons
raise the devil
the dust settles Cooperationevery which way be art and part of
flutter the dovecotes play ball
play havoc with if you can beat them, join them
make hay of in cahoots
all hell broke loose make common cause with
play merry hell with cheek by jowlplay hob circle the wagons
make a Horlicks of play footsie with someone
a hornet nest give and take327a halfway house public enemy number one
hand in glove beat the rap
put your heads together up the river
hitch horses together a rod in pickle
meet someone halfway rough justice
a meeting of minds short sharp shock
oil and water a slap on the wrist
the old school tie tar and feather
the old boy network twelve good men and true
on the same page
close ranks Crisis
you scratch my back, and ll scratch when the balloon goes up
yours when the band begins to playshoulder to shoulder burn your boats or bridges
sing from the same hymn sheet when the chips are down
it takes two to tango at the crossroads
go with the tide when it comes to the crunch
two-way street at the eleventh hour
the fat is in the fire
Courage on a knife-edgebeard the lion in his den make or break
bell the cat moment of truth
bite the bullet neck or nothing
have a lot of bottle the parting of the ways
take the bull by the horns head someone or something off at the
bury your head in the sand pass
pull someone chestnuts out of the fire point of no return
cold feet when push comes to shoveface the music cross the Rubicon
as game as Ned Kelly the last or final straw
gird your loins turn the corner
grasp the nettle
heart of oak Critics and criticism
stick your neck out an armchair critic
have nerves of steel a back-seat drivera stout heart if the capfits,wear it
whistle in the dark be on someone case
show the white feather bust someone chopsa sacred cow
Crime and punishment damned if you do and damned if you
the long arm of the law don t
six of the best dip your pen in galldo bird under fire
bring someone to book have a go atthrow the book at do a hatchet job on
the boys in blue pick holes
feel someone collar ump down someone throat
crack a crib not mince words
a hanging offence Monday morning quarterback
take the law into your own hands give someone a mouthful
at Her Majesty pleasure get it in the neck
Index 328pick nits hop the twighave a pop at oin the great majority
the pot calling the kettle black kick the bucket
rap someone over the knuckles king of terrors
cast the first stone meet your maker
straight from the shoulder pass in your ally
tear someone off a strip pop your clogs
go to your rewardDanger six feet underput your head on the block turn up your toes
a warning shot across the bows beyond the veil
chance your arm go westclose shave not be long for this world
dice with death food for worms
go through fire
too hot to hold you Debtskating on thin ice on the cuff
a lion in the way flexible friendthe lion den in hock
the lion mouth in the hole
live to tell the tale your pound of flesh
a loose cannon in Queer Streetplay with fire in the red
ride for a fall rob Peter to pay Paul
sail close to the wind on the slate
saved by the bell get square with
Scylla and Charybdis on ticksiren songthe sword of Damocles Deception and lying
hang by a thread sell someone a bill of goods
have a tiger by the tail be caught with chaff
have a wolf by the ears sail under false colours
a wolf in sheep clothing sell someone a dummyout of the woods with forked tongue
lead someone up the garden path
Death beware the Greeks bearing gifts
in Abraham bosom hook, line, and sinkerbite the big one hand someone a lemon
bite the dust al one with mirrorsgo bung nail a lie
cash in your chips accept a wooden nickel
shuffle off this mortal coi a number onpushing up the daisies a wooden nutmeg
go to Davy Jones locker sell someone a pup
hand in your dinner pail work the rabbit foot on
buy the farm come the raw prawn
go the way of all flesh take someone for a ride
give up the ghost the scales fall from someone eyes
have one foot in the grave take someone for a sleigh ride
the Grim Reaper sleight of handoff the hooks smell a rat329
smoke and mirrors go cold turkey
swing the lead kick the gong around
pull the wool over someone eyes slip someone a Mickey Finn
have a monkey on your back
Doubt and uncertainty
all bets are off Duty and responsibilitydon bet on it pass the baton
a doubting Thomas the buck stops here
it ll be a frosty Friday in July pass the bucka likely story carry the can
tell that to the marines footloose and fancy-freein a pig eye let George do it
pigs might fly be on someone own headpull the other one hold the fort
take something with a pinch of salt be left holding the babystrain at a gnat on the hook for
be someone pigeonDrinking on your plate
bend your elbow hold the sack
hit the bottle wash your hands ofin your cupsdrink like a fish Embarrassment, shame, and
drown your sorrows humiliation
drunk as a lord or skunk spare someone blushes
Dutch courage cut someone down to sizeone over the eight eat crow
full as a goog eat dirtout of your gourd with egg on your face
hair of the dog lose faceput hairs on your chest fall flat on your face
under the influence go hot and cold
lift your elbow eat humble pie
sign the pledge laugh on the other side of your face
prop up the bar lick your wounds
one for the road take someone down a peg or two
drown the shamrock red as a beetroot
two or three sheets to the wind sackcloth and ashes
sober as ajudge shoot someone down in flames
spit and sawdust a skeleton in the cupboard
the sun is over the yardarm take the starch out of someone
tie one on with your tail between your legstight as a tick
tired and emotional Equality
make a Virginia fence a cat may look at a king
walk the chalk all cats are grey in the dark
wet the baby head diamond cuts diamond
wet your whistle first among equals
even Stephens or StevensDrugs a fair field and no favour
chase the dragon meet your match330
one nation top or full whack
ask no odds a white elephantthe pot calls the kettle black
redress the balance Experiencebe no respecter of personsbabes in the wood
share and share alike know something like the back of your
six of one and half a dozen of the other hand
on termscut your teeth
be thrown in at the deep end
Excess and extravagance see the elephant
break a butterfly on a wheel find your feet
burn the candle at both ends get your feet wet at foot
coals to Newcastle teach your grandmother to suck eggs
too many cooks spoil the broth grist to the mill
have something coming out of your ears live and learn
enough is as good as a feast once bitten, twice shy
feast or famine the school of hard knocks
gild the lily spread your wings
been there, done that
the golden meanthe university of lifejump the sharkwet behind the ears
lay something on with a trowel
a man or woman of the world
the Matthew principlesow one wild oats
go overboard Family
over-egg the pudding the angel in the house
pile Pelion on Ossa tied to someone apron strings
prodigal son born on the wrong side of the blanket
take a sledgehammer to crack a nut blood is thicker than waterin spades blood will tell
over the top charity begins at home
waste not, want not a chip off the old block
a cuckoo in the nestExpense empty nester
cost an arm and a leg like father, like son
bang for your buck your own flesh and blood
break the bank hatches, matches, and despatches
not worth the candle hearth and home
cheap at the price her indoorswhat the damage? kith and kin
go Dutch your nearest and dearest
cost the earth tug of loveon the house you and yoursa king ransom
pay through the nose Fate and chanceover the odds accidents will happen
pay the piper the long arm of coincidence
a pretty penny that the way the cookie crumbles
for a song in the lap of the godstime is money lightning never strikes twice
top dollar have someone name and number on it331 Index
someone number is up Forgiveness and reconciliation
the wheel of Fortune bury the hatchet
let bygones be bygonesFood turn the other cheekbreak bread with to err is human, to forgive divine
man cannot live by bread alone kiss and make up
eat someone out of house and home mend your fences
have eyes bigger than your stomach hold out an olive branch
kill the fatted calf prodigal son
eat like a horse water under the bridge
ladies who lunch at lady wipe the slate cleanLenten faremelt in the mouth
off your oats Friends and acquaintances
get outside of Damon and Pythias
make a pig of yourself hai l-fellow-well-met
stick to your ribs man best friend
an army marches on its stomach part brass rags with
wine and dine rub shoulders withscrape acquaintance with
Fools and foolishness ships that pass in the night
there one born every minute give someone skin
a brick short of a load thick as thieves
bright spark three musketeersdead from the neck up
not playing with a ful eck
empty vessels make most noise Futility
fools rush in where angels a blind alley
fear to tread like getting blood out of a stone
play the giddy goat waste your breath
need your head examined make bricks without straw
act the maggot Buckley chancewear motley not a cat in hell chance
no more than ninepence in go round in circlesthe shilling whistle Dixie
not the full quid fight a losing battle
a right one flog a dead horse
a sandwich short of a picnic bang your head against a brick wall
not the full shilling cry over spilt milk
thick as two short planks milk the bull
silly as a wheel bark at the moon
a wise man of Gotham a needle in a haystack
painting the Forth Bridge
Foresight and the future cast pearls before swine
cross someone palm with silver plough the sand
lay something up in lavender a Pyrrhic victory
a pricking in your thumbs get a quart into a pint pot
the shape of things to come chase rainbows
a straw in the wind reinvent the wheel
time will tell a rope of sandthe writing is on the wall spitting in the wind
332
shut the stable door after the horse has on top of the world
bolted walk on air
chase your tail whoop it uptilt at windmills wine, women, and songspin your wheels
whistle in the wind Haste and speeda wild goose chaselike a bat out of hell
in the blink of an eye
Gossip and rumour like the clappersdish the dirt rattle your dags
someone ears are burning like a dose of saltshear something on the grapevine at the double
no smoke without fire at the drop of a hat
tell tales out of school put foot
bush telegraph hell for leatherget wind of hold your horses
the word on the street hustle your butt
before you can say Jack Robinson
Happiness, pleasure, and put a jerk in it
enjoyment in jig timewalk on air on the jumphave a ball before you can say knife
beer and skittles at a rate of knots
push the boat out get the lead out
be a box of birds at a lick
bread and circuses like greased lightningcakes and ale at full pelt
a bowl of cherries quick and dirty
the cherry on the cake burn rubberon cloud nine rush your fences
warm the cockles of someone heart like a scalded cat
like a dog with two tails in two shakes of a lamb tail
forbidden fruit in short order
the gaiety of nations get your skates on
everything in the garden is lovely in a tricemerry as a grig in a twinkling
in seventh heaven get a wiggle on
kick up your heels in the wink of an eye
full of the joys of spring Health and illness
over the moonthe big Cmusic to your ears
catch your deathpaint the town redlike death warmed up
the party over
in fine fettle
the primrose path
fit as a fiddleray of sunshinefit as a fleaa red letter day
green about the gills
roses, roses, all the way
give someone gypwith your tail upin the pink
be tickled pink
right as rainon the tiles333 Index
sick as a dog blow hot and cold
up to snuff see which way the cat jumps
sick to your stomach sit on the fenceright as a trivet put something on the long finger
under the weather fish or cut baitrun with the hare and hunt with the
Honesty hounds
a straight arrow hedge your bets
above board hum and haw
put your cards on the table the jury is still out
make a clean breast of something be in two minds
Mr Clean play both ends against the middle
cross my heart all at sea
straight as a die
Intelligence and knowledge
fair and square
know how many beans make fiveon the levelblind someone with science
play fair
the chattering classes
the salt of the earthtoo clever by halfScout honourculture vulture
on the square
feast of reasonon the up and upthere are no flies on at fly
Hope and optimism a man or woman of letters
brave new world know your onions
look on the bright side not just a pretty face
count your chickens be quick on the uptake
cross your fingers not rocket science
hope springs eternal have your head screwed on
light at the end of the tunnel sharp as a needle
a silver lining not suffer fools gladly
come up smiling hand on the torch
have stars in your eyes ealousy and envy
clutch at straws eat your heart out
third time lucky the grass is always greener
it an ill wind the green-eyed monster
the wish is father to the thought keep up with the Joneses
the best of both or all possible worlds nice work if you can get it
how the other half livesHypocrisy sour grapesshed crocodile tearsholier than thou ustice
Lady Bountifu ay of reckoning
pay lip service to something get your just deserts
make nice give the devil his due
physician, heal thyself what goes around comes around
the unco guid murder will outa whited sepulchre you reap what you sow
a Roland for an Oliver
Indecision and prevarication what sauce for the goose
beat about the bush is sauce for the ganderIndex 334
get a fair shake not the only pebble on the beach
one good turn deserves another make sheep eyes at someone
carry a torch forLanguage, speech, and wear the green willow
conversationhave kissed the blarney stone
Madnesstalk a blue streak have bats in the belfry
chew the fat round the bend or twist
have swallowed a dictionary off your chump
the gift of the gab away with the fairies
start a hare have kangaroos in the top paddocksay a mouthful mad as a hatter
in a nutshell lose your marbles
the pen is mightier than the sword men in white suits see man
have a plum in your mouth out of your mind
prunes and prisms nutty as a fruit cakea purple patch out to lunch
run off at the mouth off your nana
shoot the breeze go postal
have a silver tongue off your rocker
call a spade a spade have a screw loose
speak in tongues take leave of your senses
pick up stompies straws in your hair
in words of one syllable out of your tree
talk the hind leg off a donkey off your trolley
talk nineteen to the dozenMarriage
the gift of tongues
your better halfbottom drawerLazinessher indoorsa bone in your leg
make an honest woman ofeat the bread of idlenesshope chestcouch potato
tie the knotcut corners
dodge the column plight your troth
rest on your oars pop the question
come the old soldier on the shelfswing the lead Misfortune and adversitytwiddle your thumbs
with your back against the wall
a bad quarter of an hourLove bed of nails
bill and coo catch a Tartar
set your cap at a chapter of accidents
eternal triangle be caught in a cleft stick
an old flame be up the creek without a paddle
wear your heart on your sleeve have your cross to bear
hell hath no fury like a woman scorned between the devil and the deep blue sea
the light of your life the dirty end of the stick
love young dream sow dragon teeth
the boy or girl next door behind the eight ball
sweet nothings out of the frying pan into the fire335
up a gum tree have one bread buttered on both sides
under the harrow in clovercome hell or high water corn in Egypt
in hot water feel the draught
the iron entered someone soul have it easy
a pretty orfinekettle offish live off the fat of the land
go through the mill board the gravy train
a millstone round your neck live high on the hoga nail in the coffin in the lap of luxury
go pear-shaped the Mammon of unrighteousness
the rough end of the pineapple the Midas touch
any port in a storm milk and honey
buy the rabbit where there muck there brass
on the rack pennies from heavenit never rains but it pours a piece of the action
be on the receiving end on the pig back
between a rock and a hard place make your pile
roll with the punches have deep pockets
a hard row to hoe be quids inthe short end of the stick at rack and manger
slings and arrows the life of Riley
a slippery slope a roll Jack Rice couldn jump over
a spanner in the works be rolling in it
draw the short straw be born with a silver spoon in yourup a stump mouth
a thorn in someone side Tom Tiddler ground
Mistakes Nakednessin the altogetherthrow the baby out with the bathwaterin your birthday suit
back the wrong horsein the buffbark up the wrong treego commando
off base in a state of natureoff beam in the nip
up the booay in your peltput the cart before the horse in the raw
chickens come home to roost
get your wires crossed Opportunity
drop a clanger
an arrow in the quiverto err is human, to forgive divine
the ball is in someone court
put your foot in itplay your cards right
score an own goala bite at the cherrykill the goose that lays the golden egg
a fair crack of the whipshoot yourself in the footevery dog has his day
slip of the pen or tongue
as one door closes, another opens
slip on a banana skin
take time by the forelock
get hold of the wrong end of the sticknot let the grass grow under your feet
half a chance
Money, wealth, and prosperity make hay while the sun shines
an Aladdin cave a kick at the can or cat
a bed of roses kill two birds with one stone
Indexa new lease of life have someone eating out of your hand
miss the boat in the hollow of your hand
not miss a trick men in grey suits at man
in pole position a mover and shakerroom at the top have someone in the palm of your hand
seize the day in someone pocketnot a shot in your locker pull the strings
there more than one way to skin a cat hold the purse strings
let something slip through your fingers rule the roost
steal a march on in the saddlestrike while the iron is hot under someone thumb
have a second string to your bow have someone on toast
time and tide wait for no man wear the trousers
a toe in the door twist someone round your little finger
window of vulnerabilitythe world is your oyster Pregnancyhave a bun in the oven
Poverty in the pudding club
on your beam ends up the duffnot have a bean in the family way
keep body and soul together a gleam or twinkle in someone eye
from clogs to clogs in three generations the patter of tiny feet
down and out up the spoutfrom hand to mouth
not have a penny to bless yourself with
Preparation and readiness
not have two pennies to rub togetherarmed at all pointspoor as a church mouse
asleep at the wheelin Queer Streetkeep your eye on the ballfrom rags to riches
batten down the hatchesin reduced circumstancesloaded for bear
live on the smell of an oil rag
off the cuffon your uppersdot the and cross the  
keep the wolf from the door
get all your ducks in a row
at your fingertips
Power firing on all four cylinders
top banana gird your loins
get someone over a barrel grease the wheels
at someone beck and call at half cockbeggar on horseback on the hoofa big cheese ump the gun
know where the bodies are buried catch someone with their pants down
in the box seat keep your powder drycall the shots or tune prime the pump
hold all the cards shoot from the hip
play cat and mouse with on specin the catbird seat on the spur of the moment
big white chief set the stage for
cock of the walk on the stocksdance to someone tune all systems go
in the driver seat on your toes
337 Index
keep a weather eye on keep something under your hat
in the wings under the hatches
a hidden agenda
Reputation and fame keep the lid on
a black sheep someone lips are sealed
not as black as you are painted mum the word
blot your copybook on the q.t.
a blot on the escutcheon shout something from the rooftopsCaesar wife in a smoke-filled room
claim to fame under the roseunder a cloud behind the scenesgive a dog a bad name show your hand
look to your laurels a skeleton in the cupboard
a legend in their own lifetime spill the beans
the mark of Cain tip your hand
someone name is mud blow the whistle on
have your name in lights something nasty in the woodshed
no smoke without firea nine days wonder Self-interesthave an axe to grindRevenge and retribution
bite the hand that feeds yousettle accounts with someonebow down in the house of Rimmon
bay for blood
know which side your bread is buttered
the biter bitfight your corner
pay someone back in their own coin
curry favourhave it coming to youdog in the mangerday of reckoningbe your own worst enemy
get your just desertsevery man for himselfget even with
have an eye for the main chance
an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth
feather your nest
don get mad, get eventake the fiftha dose or taste of your own medicine
foul your own nestget your own backI all right, Jackpoetic justice
the law of the jungle
revenge is a dish best served coldcontemplate your navelsettle a score
put your head in a noose
tit for tat
cut off your nose to spite your face
Secrecy not in my back yard
an ace up your sleeve take care of number one
between you and me and the bedpost paint yourself into a corner
keep your cards close to your chest hoist with your own petard
sweep something under the carpet make a rod for your own back
let the cat out of the bag sell your soul to the devil
behind closed doors cut your own throat
a closed bookcover your tracks Sex
a dark horse the birds and the bees
a fly on the wall a bit on the side
blow the gaff pop someone cherrygive the game away of easy virtue338
give someone the glad eye cook on the front burner
the facts of life on the crest of a wave
a fate worse than death curl the mo
how your father cut the mustardplay the field carry the day
have the hots for your finest hour
know someone in the biblical sense a flash in the pan
lead in your pencil be in like Flynn
do a line with someone get a guernsey
put the make on happy hunting ground
nudge nudge wink wink hit the mark
get your oats hit the jackpot
get physical bring your pigs to market
on a promise place in the sunput it about go places
breed like rabbits sitting prettyred-light district ride higha roll in the hay on a roll
a bit of rough come up roses
turn a trick go down a stormwham-bam thank you ma am the top of the tree
make whoopee come or turn up trumpswin your spursStrength carry the world before you
show the flagflex your muscles Surprisetrue grit bolt from the blue
put hairs on your chest take someone breath away
hitch your wagon to a star out of a clear blue sky
an iron hand in a velvet glove out ofcountenance
a labour of Hercules that beats the Dutch
the law of the jungle you could have knocked me down with a
by main force feather
with might and main catch someone flat-footed
hold your own set someone back on their heels
pack a punch throw someone a looppump iron have eyes like saucers
show your teeth knock someone socks off
be made of sterner stuff sting in the tail
a tower of strength a turn-up for the booka tiger in your tanktough it out Thoroughness
from A to ZSuccess boots and all
bring home the bacon go for brokego with a bang from go to whoa
go down a bomb go the whole hogthe brass ring a lick and a promise
work like a charm go the extra mile
close but no cigar in for a penny, in for a pound339 Index
root and branch seven-league boots
from soda to hock a magic carpetfrom soup to nuts as the crow flies
stay the course on the gad
leave no stone unturned hit the road
pull out all the stops go round the houses
get itchy feet
Time knight of the road
arrow of time live out of a suitcase
waltz Matildaonce in a blue moonMexican overdriveturn back the clock
ride the rails
till the cows come homeride shotgun
in a dog ageround Robin Hood barn
donkey yearsa rolling stonethe year dotput down roots
a movable feasta sabbath day journey
a fly in amber on Shanks pony
till hellfreezesover pull up stakestill kingdom come up sticksmany moons ago on the stump
a month of Sundays go walkabouta New York minute
before the Rinderpestround the clockUnhappiness and
time immemoria isappointment
the watches of the night your heart sinks into your boots
the witching hour beat your breast
a dog life
Traitors and treachery down in the mouth
point the bone at down in the dumpsturn cat in pan dust and ashes
do the dirty on someone eat your heart out
fifth column end in tears
a fair-weather friend a ghost at the feast
beware the Greeks bearing gifts a kick in the teetha Judas kiss a lump in your throat
night of the long knives sick as a parrot
sell the pass a slap in the face
a poisoned chalice vale of tears
play someone false wear the green willow
put someone pot on wormwood and gall
sell someone down the river wring your hands
a snake in the grassa stab in the back Violencea Trojan horse blood and guts
a viper in your bosom blood and thunderhave blood on your hands
Travel and transport give someone Bondia bird of passage bunch of fives
ride bodkin tap someone claret340
beat the living daylights out of chuck it downduke it out the eye of the storm
the gloves are off the heavens openedgo the knuckle Indian summer
punch someone lights out a London particular
tear someone limb from limb rain cats and dogs
get physical lovely weather for ducks
take a pop at
a Procrustean bed Work and employment
he who lives by the sword dies by the get the boot
sword hang up your bootsbeat the tar out of someone bread and butter
have been in the wars on the broo
burn the midnight oilWarfare a busman holidaya call to arms get your cards
blood and iron get the gate
the dogs of war a golden handshake
the pen is mightier than the sword put someone out to grassa pitched battle hit the bricks
rattle sabres obs for the boys
a roll of honour live over the shop
throw away the scabbard put someone out to pasture
take the King or Queen shilling walk the plank
beat swords into ploughshares the oldest profession
the late unpleasantness punch the time clock
the war to end all wars give someone the push
hang out your shingleWeaknesstalk shopan Achilles heelput up the shutters
besetting sinthe smell of the lampbig girl blouse
old Spanish customs
built on sandby the sweat of your brow
a chink in someone armourBuggins turna faint heart
walk of lifehave feet of clay see foot
on the wallaby trackhit where you livea house of cards Youth
a house divided angry young manman of straw the awkward age
milk and water babes in the wooda paper tiger bright young thing
a broken reed a broth of a boy
fall apart at the seams at your mother or father knee
knock the stuffing out of knee-high to a grasshopper
poor little rich girl or boy
Weather your salad daysblow great guns ugly ducking
brass monkey take years off someone
